Sources and beef and land.
New Zealand really supports the government's intent
to make the new framework more streamlined and practical,
and to have fewer consents for farmers
and more permitted activities.
However, you know,
we feel the way the legislation is currently written doesn't
match the government's intent,
and farmers could be worse off.
So significant changes are needed to the legislation thief
and Land's been working across the agricultural sector
with a number of other groups,
and there's really strong alignment on the
issues that need to be fixed.
Uh, given the time available.
I'm just gonna focus on three of the critical areas
that directly impact sheep and beef farmers like me.
And so these are the goals underpinning the legislation.
Uh, freshwater farm plans
and stock drinking water pool will then cover off the
setting of achievable limits
and how we manage progress towards limits,
including market mechanisms.
So, firstly, it's critical that we get the goals
and the natural environment bill, right?
These will guide how the rest of the bill is interpreted.
One of the government stated objectives of RMA reform is
to enable primary sector growth and development.
Uh, the problem is that there's no express recognition in
the NEB of the importance of a viable agricultural sector
or the importance of natural resources for food production.
A critical change that beef and lamb is seeking is the
specific goal in the legislation to recognize
and provide for food production so
that this can be taken into account
by councils when they're developing
their regional freshwater plans.
Uh, in terms of freshwater farm plans,
significant work is needed to the bill to ensure
that they add value and they don't become just a box
sticking exercise that adds complexity and compliance.
Uh, beef and lambs view is that the level of compliance
and the amount of detail that farmers need
to include in their, uh,
farm plan should reflect the risks from their
farm currently.
However, under the framework, all farmers will need
to do either a certified or audited plan.
All risks will need to be identified
and all actions to mitigate those
risks outlined in the plan.
Many farmers will also need
to get a consent on top of that farm plan.
Now, this is a significant uptick in regulatory oversight
and red tape for most of our farmers.
So beef and lamb supports certified
and audited farm plans as an alternative to a consent,
but the bill does not currently make this alternative clear.
And beef and lamb is proposing changes to make sure
that farm plans can replace consents in
appropriate circumstances.
Most sheep and beef farmers currently don't need a consent
to farm for lower risk farms.
The level of oversight
and detail in the plan required should be far less.
A critical beef and lamb recommendation is to allow
for low risk farms on the, to not need to do a plan
or for that plan to simply be auditable.
That's similar to what's currently required in Canterbury,
and it's working really well.
Beef and lamb are proposing other changes to ensure
that the level of compliance
and the details required to match the risk.
But, and I'll leave that to questions.
Uh, if you want more information, uh, just quickly
before I hand over to Paul, I'll move on
to stock drinking water.
So, taking water for animal drinking is absolutely critical
for all pastoral farming.
It's a fundamental animal welfare requirement.
The current wording in the RMA,
which has been brought across
to the NEP has caused some unintended problems,
and we need to fix it.
A recent example is the, uh, freshwater plan for Hawkes Bay.
Uh, due to the wording of the current RMA,
this plan is proposing that new water takes
for stock drinking water are prohibited
while there's still a consenting pathway
for new takes for irrigation.
Now, this is nonsensical
as stock drinking water takes are just half a percent
of the total water take in that catchment.
So, beef Land's proposed solution for this is
to make it clear that stock drinking water
is a permitted activity.
So now I'll hand over to Paul to talk about some
of our proposals to address issues relating to limit setting
and managing towards limits.
Thank you.
Thank you, Kate. Good morning.
Setting environmental limits
and managing to these limits is core our issues of the NEB.
The NEB has a much stronger
and more directive focus on getting back within
environmental limits that must be set.
The Army a has limits, but it is not
as director about getting back within them.
Regional councils can often set aspirational limits.
For example, in my, they're trying to get back
to 1863 levels.
In other councils, they have proposed limits where,
where some of their native captures cannot even reach,
or that would require 80 or 90% reduction in losses.
Whereas to meet the minimum bottom lines would only require
20% reduction.
These aspirational limits are often unachievable.
The government's intent was
to have a more staged intervention approach,
where more enabling regulatory tools like farm plans
and permit activities
and non-regulatory mechanisms are used
for more punitive regulatory mechanisms.
We support this approach.
However, the heavy focus only be on getting back from the
environmental limits, even if they're aspirational
cuts across this intent.
The draft means that if a limit is not met,
the existing farmers cannot be permitted,
but have to get a consent as well
as do a f fresh water farm plan.
Punitive farm level resource caps will be used
and new activity, new
activities will struggle to be allowed.
We are therefore proposing changes to NB
to help set more realistic limits.
Reef and LAMB is recommending regional councils be required
to undertake economic analysis of
what more ambitious limits would mean and
provided justification report if
they're planning to set them.
We're also proposing change to language
around the achieving of these limits.
So there's more proportionality
and flexibility about how it's done and what's achieved.
We note that all municipal discharges
and essential infrastructure discharges are basically exempt
from having to meet environmental limits.
Municipal waste water discharge can be significant.
For example, they can account for 15 to 25%
of the discharge amounts of phosphorus for some catchments.
If municipal and essential infrastructure charged are
exempt, this makes a need for flexibility in meeting limits,
even more critical beef
and lamb also has serious concerns about the legislative
framework, allowing the introduction of market mechanisms,
which takes and discharges to water
and also resource rentals.
The need be established a framework
and does not turn these mechanisms on,
but manis can enable them very quickly.
Interview does not support these mechanisms
and they should be left out the NEB for now
and work undertaken to investigate them more fully.
Thank you. We're very happy to take questions.
Thank you very much for your submission.
Uh, look, we'll go to LAN farm first for a question.
Tina, good morning. Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I wanted to
pick up firstly on just a few questions of clarification.
So the first was just around the stock drinking water
situation that you describe about that being prohibited.
A plan. Is that about water quality
or It is just about at some sort of blanket idea that
It is a water quantity issue.
So they, the, the, um, it's the tank catchments there.
So they're, um, on paper over allocated, uh,
for water takes mm-hmm.
Which is mainly, um, municipal tank and industry. Mm-hmm.
So, uh, uh,
sting rules less than 0.5% in some of those catchments.
Okay. Um, but the proposal put forward, well,
it's going from environmental at the moment, so it's, um,
a decisions version, um, is to grandparent existing takes
and prohibit new takes, even though irrigation
has a consented pathway. We just find that.
Okay, thank you. Pick up on, yeah, you go and then I will.
Um, so what would be the impact of that, if, if, if
That proceeded Through and what
Would be the impact? So the
impact would be massive of, say it would, it was,
it would cut across flexibility
and, uh, development for farming,
but you get really perverse outcomes,
so you can't even deintensify.
So if, um, you know, an irrigator, for example,
or commercial vegetable production for example, wanted
to actually go to sheep
and beef un irrigated,
they can't get new stock drinking water.
So it just cuts across land flexibility even in when
you're de inten supply.
So it's pretty perverse outcome.
So I might just ask the stuff on that,
'cause you did give Hawkes Bay as an example
with the stock drinking water.
Mm-hmm. Like, and obviously you've talked about land
diversification, but what about the current situation?
Like, could you give a practical example of like how
that could impact a farmer?
Um, well, Hawkes Bay is current in the sense that's,
that's the current plan that's there has been appealed.
Yeah. Um, well it, it just makes a, it puts a lot
of cost onto a normal activity of, of taking water
for stock drinking water, particularly for she be farms,
you know, it's animal welfare issue
and they're very low takes
and they have to be given what they're taking.
Mm-hmm. Um, if there's worries about intensification
and other things they can, can controlled if needed
for other mechanisms
and land use change, et cetera, you don't need to actually,
it's a byproduct, almost
any increase in stock drinking water.
Generally though we're de intensifying
and using stock water more efficiently.
So this has massive impacts from either the cost of metering
and, and showing, showing compliance.
Uh, and BI say cut costs like flexibility
and options around land use,
even if we de intensifying. Mm-hmm.
But also, I guess practically a farmer's
stock numbers shift.
Yes. Quite a lot. So I mean, if you are, it's grandparent
to a certain date of the stock you had on that date
and how much water take you were taking.
So it completely freezes a farmer's
flexibility, um, every year.
What stock numbers change based on grass
and, um, what the market is doing.
So it locks that farmer in at, um,
that date May, 2022. I think it was
May, 2020.
Okay. I Think a really, um,
a really practical example would be if you wanted
to run lambs in an orchard Yeah.
For example, that would be prohibited
because there would be no ability
to get a stop water take for that.
Yeah. No, that's, that's perfect example. Thank you.
Uh, look, LAN, have you got a supplementary on that?
It, it's another question, another question. Clarification.
Okay. Yes. Um, so just you, you use the comment that some
of the limits being set in the Y cut are trying to get back
to 1863 levels.
Can you expand on that?
Yeah, so the, there's the strategy within Waikato is part
of the settlement, and that was about restoring the,
the Waikato River as well as other, um, uh, you know,
healthy communities, et cetera.
Uh, part of how that was interpreted as part
of plan change won there, Waikato was, um, uh,
council went off and,
and tried to work out what the river quality was from 1863,
which was a, a brave effort probably, um, came up
with those particular, uh, attribute states, uh,
and then have put that in, um, as the, the,
and then the plan change one is
that the step get getting towards that.
Okay. Because just to supplement on that, so I mean,
because you mentioned later in your submission about
your perception of the, uh,
goals about life supporting capacity, uh,
is too high essentially.
Whereas we are hearing from other people
that the life supporting capacity is actually a very low bar
when it comes to ecosystem or human health.
How does, like, do you think there is a place for
strong limits
that might protect even the life supporting capacity
as a low bar, but ideally have sort of a highly
of environmental protection?
That's a really good question. I think
that's the nub of the issues here.
And the way the NEB treats limits, it doesn't differentiate
between something that's trying to protect you and health
or a critical life support and capacity
and something that's much more aspirational trying to get,
for example, back to pristine.
And we've got councils that want to get back to a
or B band when you don't even get
those in native catchments.
So we're not against limits,
but I think they need to be, um, you know, um, calibrated to
what you're trying to achieve and the
achievability of, of that.
And we definitely need to be working, um,
towards achieving some
of those bottom lines if they're appropriate and achievable.
And we've just got a supplementary over here, Priyanka,
just, just on that point,
'cause you're right, that is the crux
of the matter before us.
How would you, when you say it needs to be calibrated
to something that's practical,
how would you legislate for that?
Where would you, where would you set that limit?
Yeah, I think there needs to be a different,
it's, it is a gnarly question.
I think it needs to be, there needs to be a differentiation
between those, um, human health bottom lines and,
and maybe ecosystem and other bottom lines
and those more aspirational, uh, targets
and how, uh, agriculture
and other industries are then controlled, um, in terms
of the, uh, you know, the amount of oversight, the,
the costs, what's expected in terms of the reduction.
'cause we have a very, um, numeric myopic sort
of approach at the moment that we think we can set a, a,
a loading or a number in the,
and then we'll make sure everybody has to reduce by 20%.
And we, we just can't do that.
We don't have the tools, we don't have the knowledge.
Um, so we're setting ourselves up for fail.
So I think some of those more aspirational targets,
you need a mechanisms around more direction
to travel best efforts.
You're obviously gonna need guardrails
around intensification and other things.
We just need a bit of a different approach
depending on what we're trying to achieve.
So what we are suggesting in terms of
how you set those limits is putting more focus on the
regional council's doing that work up front to look at
what their background levels are,
what their catchment context is.
Because oftentimes we are seeing in catchment, uh,
council set targets that don't take account of that
and actually look to get back to pristine, which,
so we're looking to sort of recommend that a lot of
that work's done up front as well
as the economic impact of that.
So that councils aren't doing that work often,
the economic impact comes out
when we're in the environment court.
Yep. And then the analysis comes out about what the cost of
what some of the rules might be.
So we're wanting to front load that process to help set
more, you know, to help with that community process
to set those limits mm-hmm.
At the right level for that community.
And they're informed about, yeah.
Background levels, catchment to context,
economic impact. Absolutely.
Thank you. Thank you. Look, we'll move on
to another question from Ryan Hamilton. Thanks.
It's actually flow into a supplementary
now 'cause of all around limits.
Um, you mentioned in your submission you'd rather see
outcomes rather than hard num, numerical limits,
which might be Yeah.
Hard. But what might some of those outcomes be? Instead
It's about outcomes such as swimming and,
and healthy ecosystems, et cetera.
One of the problems we have at the moment with the RMA,
particularly the NPS freshwater management is,
I say it's quite numeric focused.
You pick some of the attributes such nitrogen, phos,
and set numbers around those.
And those are only some of the drivers
that look at things like para fighting
growth or ecosystem health.
There's lots of other things like temperature and shading
and lots of other levers that can be pulled.
So as very said, we want much more work done at the front
end of all the levers that can be pushed,
what's the best cost effective way
of getting there within the freshwater farm plans within
these action plans that are being proposed.
So we have a much more nuanced way of looking at
that and a wider wise
As well, perhaps.
Thanks, Kate. So holistic.
Yes. More holistic. Yep.
Thank you. And Grant Palam has a question. You,
You, you talk about the goals.
Um, so from,
and obviously, you know, it'd be fair to say
that quite a few, um, submitters have come in here
and wanted input into the goals, right?
Yep. Yep. We could have a list about this. Yeah. Long.
Why would you say that
and why, why do you think through production should be
particular, in particular brought into the goals?
Yeah. Um, well, I think without having it there,
it cuts across the key enabling intent of enabling, uh,
primary production, the intents of, of the bill.
Um, unfortunately at the moment, the goals, um,
'cause particularly the, a part of that
with environmental sets up a bit of a hierarchy.
Mm-hmm. And doesn't enable, um, the use
and development of land in the way we think we would be,
as we've just been discussing around
how it should be considered.
Um, you know, our cultures
of food product is obviously absolute key part
of the economy and the key part of, of,
uh, resource use actually.
So we need to balance them together
with the different wellbeings.
Um, so we think it would be appropriate to recognize
and provide for food production, uh,
to allow basically the consideration around the social
and economic impacts when
we're going through these processes.
Um, and as we say, same sort of consideration
that the planning bill puts in for municipal
and, um, essentially infrastructure discharges,
they've considered, they have, there's a huge cost to them.
They're important, um,
and there's limitations on engineering, uh, et cetera.
So they've given them an easier different pathway.
I'm not saying we need an easier pathway.
We need some consideration around the other impacts,
not just environmental limits.
Good, Thanks. Thank you.
And I might just jump in here with a question
because, um, a lot
of your submission does focus on the farm plans,
and you've mentioned it briefly in your oral submission.
Can you just elaborate a little bit further on the
complexity of this
and where you feel that it needs
to be streamlined in the legislation?
Yes, certainly. Um, so some of this will come
through in the ST legislation,
but we need, we need it set up properly in
the primary legislation.
So for us, we, you know,
freshwater farmland should be risk based, proportional
and cost effective
and, you know, work for the environment effectively.
So at the moment, unfortunately,
the way Schedule five is set up, all effects everywhere have
to be identified
and they're managed so that it's not,
it's not identifying material impacts
that those farmers are having on what needs
to be looked at within that catchment.
'cause obviously farmers only have so much money, they need
to know where to prioritize their, um,
investment and the mitigations.
Um, there's a lot of cost around certification auditing,
huge costs, particularly for extensive she and bee farmers.
'cause having a certified call over the whole farm, trying
to get into every critical source and every water,
every wetland and what needs to happen.
And every slope is very, very expensive.
So we need to make sure that's much more risk based
and proportional to what we're trying
to achieve at the moment.
The, the schedule basically, um, for example, if, if,
if it's a high risk activity just in terms of into grazing
or, um, the irrigation, the whole farm has to get certified,
even if only part of that farm is doing that activity.
So there's some of these things that need to be worked
through to make it much more cost effective.
Okay. No, thank you for that.
And Cameron had a supplementary, uh, well,
I was on primary. Well,
Here. Thanks. You, um,
uh, you, you've
and your submission, you talk about some ambiguous terms
sneaking into the legislation.
Um, you know, it's unclear what, uh,
unreasonably inappropriate, well-functioning,
what makes something high, um, high standard,
significant life supporting
case, and all of these new terms.
What will happen if we don't have a, a defined definition
around these terms if the legislation's passed?
Yes. Um, I, I, it's a hard one here
'cause we're trying to move on from the
RMA to a certain extent.
Um, but there are some things within the RM A
that have been sorted out and worked on.
Um, and rightly, wrongly, introducing a lot
of new terms when we're trying
to make a more cost effective, streamlined,
and a more efficient system,
it's gonna sort of work against that.
'cause we're just gonna be in court trying to argue a lot
of these, these terms, tick, they're very ambitious, um,
ambiguous, um, you know, courts have, trying to work out
what safeguard means, for example, and not really land it.
So we need to nail some of those terms a lot better.
Yeah. So basically increased litigation. Yeah.
Years of increased litigation.
Every new word leads to lots of legal cases interpreting it.
That's why we wanna sort of narrow down
or make sure that those definitions are as clear as they can
Be. Thank
you. Look, thank you very much.
We have met time this morning.
Uh, we appreciate your time and,
and the work that you've put into the submission.
There's lots of, um, considerations in there.
So thank you very much. Thanks, Dan.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thanks Kate. So we now welcome
through our next submitter I, uh,
public health communication center.
That me? Yes. Um,
and I noticed online that people had, um,
PowerPoint presentations.
Am I able to give that to somebody? Um, yes, I'm sure.
Um, okay. That's all good.
What if I join? Um, okay. I'll give that a go.
Um, it's not crucial. Yeah. Okay.
Maybe just in the essence of time, um,
'cause we just have 20 minutes.
Yeah. And, uh, we obviously have your submission,
so if you just want to, you know, open up
and talk us through the submission
and then we'll open up for, for questions in a discussion.
Yeah. Great. Okay. So sorry, chair.
I did just wanna check, um, the submission that we were
provided with just sub one, it was a really short, is is
that, I just wanted to check.
Are we missing a standard submission?
There was a longer submission Yeah. That came in.
So we don't have that then.
So maybe it would, maybe it would be worthwhile.
Well then she provide later that we can,
Let's, I can just bring up Zoom
Right now. Okay. See if,
see if it works.
'cause that might be, uh, better.
Um, and more comprehensive.
Yeah. Because obviously we just thought
We had the one Submission.
Okay. So that's, that will be on the tool though, members.
So maybe if you want to just
Log on, it's,
And that might be helpful.
Is that it? Could we get that, um,
that submission up on the tool
Jordan, Just so then we can maybe save a little
Bit of time.
Take me two more minutes. Apologies. Laura. Worries.
It's all good. Are we here?
It's in your, until now. Okay. Thank you.
My laptop was unhelpful.
Yeah, I know. And so is mine.
That's Always the way.
Suddenly when you wanna use technology, we go for
that. Good hard copy.
Reliable.
Is that fast track one? Was it
The fast track one? Yeah.
No, it shouldn't be fast track.
It should be specifically on
NEB and the Oh yeah, this does say far true.
Um, okay. I'm just really conscious of time. Oh.
And it being, you know, a valuable discussion here.
So why don't you just, um, open up
and, uh, we'll get into it
and then we can, you know, further discussion.
And in the meantime, members, perhaps if you wanted
to bring it up on your tools, on your online devices,
what's the one you can go back into the evidence. That's
Okay. That's,
I'm happy to answer questions
and can talk and brilliant.
Talk it through. So, um, Koto, my name's Marni Prickett.
I'm the, uh, I'm a research fellow at Otago University,
but I also am the science lead at, um,
the Public Health Communication Center, which is based out
of Otago University,
but it's an independently funded organization
and we are dedicated to, uh, increasing the reach
and impact of public health research.
So that's our, that's our role
and our purpose is to effectively communicate public health
research and evidence, uh, in order to protect
and improve the health and the wellbeing
and the equity of the people who live INO New Zealand.
And the health, of course, of the
environment in which we live.
And so that's, um, that's the purpose
of me being here this morning, is
to communicate public health evidence
and talk through the implications of this bill, um,
of these bills, I should say, uh, for public health.
And so the overarching message I want to, um, send
to the select committee this morning is, is to think
of these, uh, bills as public health bills.
I know that they do many things.
They have many roles, but they are
fundamental public health bills.
They protect against illness,
against injury and against death.
In, in severe cases where you have, we have major problems,
they have a, they will have a profound impact on the health
and wellbeing of generations of New Zealanders.
So they are going to have lasting impacts on how well, um,
people are, how thriving their communities are, whether
or not they're facing things like, um, uh,
like air pollution, like drinking water pollution, um, and,
and other harms of ev of environmental degradation.
So the implications of these bills could be positive.
Um, if they are rewritten currently as they're written, um,
to date, they will have negative and, and, uh,
and that they'll have nev negative impacts on
people's health and wellbeing.
They're likely to deepen, uh, the harm
of environmental degradation.
They're likely to intensify,
intensify climate change impacts.
And they're very likely to entrench inequalities
and inequities that leave some of our people
and communities particularly vulnerable
and suffering unjust hardship
and ill health for these bills to have a positive legacy,
which I'm sure that you all want.
They need to have. And I know we've talked about there being
a long list of goals,
but I think that health must be one of the goals.
It is something that is fundamental to all of us.
It's something that we, we, we, no matter your colors,
they are, it's something that's very important to us,
all the health and wellbeing
of our families and our communities.
So health must be a goal.
And in order to achieve the health and wellbeing of people
and communities, we need to have health
of the environment as a goal.
It's hopefully by now, uh,
as we've just seen over the summer,
we've had extreme weather events.
Um, it's hopefully abundantly clear
to all on the select committee
that we have eroded our foundation, the foundation
of the natural environment by continuing to degrade it,
um, relentlessly really.
Uh, and when we damage that foundation
of the natural environment,
we leave ourselves more vulnerable, more exposed
to the impacts of climate change.
We leave ourselves more vulnerable to, uh, to illness,
to injury, and, um, and to death.
And I'm not exaggerating when I say death,
3000 New Zealanders die prematurely each year from air
pollution, um, as an, as a, as an underlying, um, driver of
that premature death.
And we also have had deaths from drinking water
contaminations and other, um, environmental pollution.
So for this reason, I'm, I'm trying to convey to you, you,
my overarching message, which is
that this is a public health bill.
These are public health bills.
Uh, but also I wanna get across today
that if these bills allow for ongoing degradation
of the natural environment, as they do
as they're currently written, they will not endure, almost
by definition they will not endure
because they will increase the harms to the community.
And the public will not want to endure that.
And those harms to the environment amplify one another.
So you don't just get one harm to the environment,
which sits in isolation.
They contribute to each other, and they,
and they become cascading effects
and they amplify that impact.
The public will not want to endure that.
They should not have to endure that.
But as these bills are currently written,
they will have to endure that.
They'll have to endure ongoing degradation
of their natural environment and the implications of that.
Others have already talked about the failure of these bills
to adequately address climate change.
So they have very minimal, um, uh, regard to climate change.
Climate change, which is one
of the biggest impacts on our health
and wellbeing in, in the future now and into the future.
Um, and that's only going to get worse.
We talk about adaptation,
but a adapting to what, you know, if we don't mitigate,
then the adaptation will become more and more
and more challenging and more difficult.
And we are seeing around the country, people attempting
to adapt under very challenging, um, circumstances.
And we, I think about Tafti for example, out in Gisborne,
that is, those rolling challenges are very
difficult to adapt to.
And we often, I think we throw
around the word adaptation quite loosely,
but adapt to what,
what are we expecting our communities to adapt to?
So, um, I'm going to, um,
just focus on two really specific policy issues
because it's a, these are really big bills.
We have limited time. And I just wanted to sort
of drill down into the two things
that I thought were most important, um, for public health.
Actually, they're probably not the most important
for public health, but they are front of mind for me,
and I think they're really, really important.
And that is, uh, limits.
Um, so we've talked about limits, uh, earlier today.
Um, and also I wanna talk about hierarchy
and the idea of primacy of the natural environment,
because I think that that's often misunderstood.
Um, the, the value of that, if you do manage
to get my full submission, which I hope does come through
to you, um, you'll see that, um, uh, along with, uh,
o my other co-authors, we wrote a, um,
what's called a briefing on Public
Health Communication Center.
Um, and it's a briefing on the implications of these,
of this bill for drinking water.
And the limits come into that really clearly.
So, so we back in, back in the day,
Amy Adams, when she was the Minister for the environment,
she talked about, um,
limits in the national policy statement.
And she talked about the reason
that you would have a bottom line is that
that's a safety net for the public.
That was the word that she used.
You described it as a safety net.
And limits are a safety net. There are safety net for you.
You should be able to improve wherever
you, you would like to go.
I think it's onto on the community, if they would like
to get to that B band, get to
that a band, depending on where they are.
Um, the, but you need to have a bottom line.
And that's where National Pol National
level policy comes in.
And the bottom lines are, as Amy Adams said, uh,
a safety net for the public.
But what's presented in the MBE partic, NEB, sorry,
particularly is, is a safety net that is full of holes.
There are so many holes in those, in those
that limit setting process that anything really could get
through to the point where you have, uh, where you,
if you're not going to meet those limits,
you can simply write a justification report.
There doesn't seem to be any sort of, um, you know,
how many communities can write
or how many councils get
to write a justification report saying they're not going
to meet their limits before those justification
reports become absurd.
I mean, you, you could just have, you know, are 50%
of the councils going be able to write justification limits
to say that they're not going to meet those limits?
There's a, there's it, it, it doesn't, it's,
it's one of those holes.
The other hole is that these aren't going
to be evidence-based limits.
They're going to, they are going to, uh, they're not going
to take into consideration physical
realities in the environment.
We do have to make values judge value judgements as, um,
decision makers and policy makers.
But we can't make value judgements around what,
around physical reality,
biophysical realities in the environment.
Things do what they are going to do.
There are realities that, um, that we have to consider.
And so those limits are already making that value judgment.
They're making the value judgment too early in the process.
They're saying we need to weigh up our, our communities, um,
uh, uh, economic aspirations in the setting of those limits,
rather than having limits that are on a, uh, on a, um, sort
of grading system as they are in the NPS.
Um, and then choosing among those limits, but,
but not allowing for, uh,
but still having that backstop of the, of the bottom line.
And it's interesting to hear that, um,
that life supporting capacity has become a new,
a new and unusual term.
Life supporting capacity has been in the RMA since
19, um, 91.
So it's not a new term.
And we have, um, we have, have had that in our law
for some time finally.
Um, and, and there are other issues to do with those limits.
I'm sure that you've sort of worked your way through them,
but there, there are many ways that you can, that people,
councils polluters can avoid, um,
avoid meeting those limits.
Um, it's written in, as I say, there are just many,
many holes, you know, giving a, um, uh, consideration of,
for example, I'll just look up the exact term there.
Um, yeah.
Have regard to, rather than give effect two.
So in the NPS it was, uh, it was give effect two,
and now it's have regard to, so, so all
of these things add up for drinking water, particularly
that drinking water comes out of our environment.
It is not disconnected from our environment.
I heard the previous speaker suggest
that we could have human health limits
and environmental limits.
Actually, those things are, are very much intertwined.
And drinking water is a really good example of that,
which will bring me onto my last point.
'cause I'm conscious that, um, that I'm making time.
Just to let you know, you literally have
about five minutes left.
Yes. So, uh, and they've asked some members
with questions, so Okay.
If you want to, I'll finish, finish wrap up.
I'll finish up. Yeah, I'll finish up.
So, so the reason that,
that this brings me onto hierarchy is that, is that
we, we've, we've really misinterpreted this, this idea
of the hierarchy of obligations.
We've, we've kind of had it as a winners
and losers thing in our mind, whereas to me,
what it says is it's saying we have to look
after that foundation first.
We look after the foundation, the water body itself,
which is where we draw our drinking water from.
And if that water isn't clear, like in very good state,
it's gonna be very expensive to treat, often unaffordable
to treat, um, think about sediment and, um,
and nitrates, particularly when
you're thinking about stuff like that.
Uh, and so if you protect that foundation through the,
through tam, OT wine
and that hierarchy of obligations,
then you can provide good quality drinking
water to the community.
You can have stability and health in your community
because you're able to provide that, um, stability.
And then you can consider your activities on top of that,
which are, which are hopefully restoring
and having minimal impact on the environment.
That will take some time, obviously,
because we've got a long way to go.
Um, but ultimately the idea is
that you have a healthy foundation.
You have, you're able to provide that drinking water and,
and you're able to consider your other activities in your
community that you need to
undertake. So I'll leave it there.
Brilliant. Thank you very much.
Uh, we've got a question from Grant, and then we'll go to LA
Yeah. Thank you very much for
presentation.
Um, so what do you say?
'cause I mean, you know, you, you wanna put the, the health
of the water body and the, at the, at the very top right?
And so what do you say to, uh, and, and,
and not have e the economic, um,
consideration sit alongside the health of the environment.
You want the healthy environment over to sit on top of that.
So what do you say to the, um, I, I'll pick, you know,
I'm a farmer farming communities who, uh, uh, have,
have acknowledged that we've gotta work over time
to improve our impact, yet they've still gotta make a living
and employ people and create jobs for, you know, for people
and, and, and, and income for our economy so we can pay
for the thoughts of things that you'd like to achieve.
What do you say to those families?
They're sitting in a hall and they're,
and they're faced with the, um, uh, someone saying to them,
well, actually, we don't think
what you are doing is good enough and, and,
and the health
of the water body is more important than the health
of your family's businesses, so forth.
I would say again, that we've, we've understood this
and it, and we've flipped how we are thinking about this.
And I honestly think that it's partly a semantic,
semantic issue if we don't protect our
foundation that we live.
So you don't want to erode the foundation.
And the foundation is a sta stable environment.
And farmers more than anybody need a stable environment.
They, they, you know, climate change is going
to have a huge impact on, uh, on farming
and agriculture in New Zealand.
And I know that farmers all over the country,
many farmers have managed to actually restore
that foundation on their farm at farm scale
and sometimes at catchment scale,
but most often at farm scale, they're restoring that,
that foundation and they're actually protecting
that foundation in perpetuity.
And so what I would say is no winix is expecting
that things change overnight.
That is not, you know, new Zealanders are reasonable people.
We are not expecting that farm, all farming
and agriculture switches overnight.
But we are expecting that
because our foundation is now so eroded
that it is harming us.
We are expecting that we will, that we will restore
that foundation to the point
where it can support us all in perpetuity,
our our children, our grandchildren.
And if we continue to erode that foundation,
those farming communities are gonna
struggle as much as anybody.
So it's not about people doing the wrong
thing and not enough thing.
It's about recognizing that the health
of the water body, it's not coming first.
It's not a winners and losers game.
That's what you said? No,
You said it were coming first.
That's what, how it's written in the No, I said no.
I actually intentionally flipped it.
I flipped it and I said, this is not
about winners and losers.
It's not about first seconds and thirds.
It's about foundations of, of the foundation
of the environment, then the stability of the community
and access to good quality drinking water.
'cause nothing shuts down a community faster than not having
good access to good quality water.
And then it's about, about reviewing
and managing our activities,
including our commercial activities over time, so
that they minimize the harm
that they have on those other things that we need.
Okay. Just time for one last quick question. Um,
Thank you so much for the analogy of the safety net.
And you mentioned, um, the importance
of like intergenerational equity.
Do you think there is a way to sort
of have almost like a backstop in the legislation, like
with something like a maintain
or improve clause that, you know,
given this is pretty rushed
and we're moving through this process, we could just get
to the question, mom, we've gotta move.
Is, is a maintainer improve something that could be
Part of that? Yes.
Maintainer improve?
I'm, I'm, I'm baffled why maintainer improve isn't there.
We've had maintainer improve since 20, um, 14.
It came in under a national government.
So really good idea, maintain or improve.
It's basically just saying that, um,
that you shouldn't allow further degradation.
And that's what I'm saying is that if this gov,
if this builds, which, which it currently does, allows
for further degradation, it won't endure by definition.
It will not endure, it can't.
And so maintain or improve to me is kind
of a, a mini, a minimum.
Um, yeah, that should be there.
Okay. Look, thank you very much for your submission.
Um, and we will ensure that if we get
that submission up online as well,
alongside the supplement. Excellent. And thank you.
Apologies for mucking
around on my computer at the beginning.
No, our, it was our error,
so we should be, yeah, obviously.
Um, that's something to keep in mind
with PowerPoints though, in terms of being able
to bring them in on us.
V but it was your submission as well. No, no, I understand.
So, uh, we do apologize that that was a,
obviously a technical oversight.
So, uh, we'll ensure that that is up online
and, um, properly dealt too.
So, so thank you very much. Thank you very much.
So we now welcome our next submitter oh,
who we can see there online.
Joining us with us today to Whanau, uh, Nui.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have 20 minutes with us, so we will hand it over to you,
uh, to open up
and just talk us through your submission. Thank you.
Thank you.
My name is, I'm one of the, uh, lawyers for,
joined with me today is my colleague Natalie Coates.
Uh, together we have worked, uh,
extensively on the TE Treaty settlement.
Uh, and that is the background context
for our written submission, uh,
which goes into the technical aspects as to
how this proposed, uh, legislation,
this proposed reform will impact detrimentally and
and irreparably on the TE Treaty settlement.
Uh, and, uh, we look today to speak to you around a couple
of the key points, um, that set the context for
that submission, uh,
and then represent an ANU position on this, uh,
proposed legislation legislation.
So if I could start by saying that,
uh, reject that the Crown have the constitutional capacity
to implement
and create this legislation without extensive agreement
and engagement with them.
Uh, and for that position, te
arrest on the rights
and guarantees inside tei, which were signed by four
of the chiefs on the 14th of June, 1840,
those rights contained in Article two of TE
expressly, uh, preserve a guarantee unto, uh,
for the continued exercise of the Tonga over their lands,
forests, estates, Kaga,
and all other Tonga of which the, uh, natural
and built environment, uh, considered part of
that ancestral estate.
So in taking that forward, uh, retention of its,
which is acknowledged by the Crown
inside the initial treaty settlement, um,
really reflects for, uh,
the crown's acknowledgement that it's,
and the guarantees of it survived the signing of and
therefore need to be operationalized
and implemented by the government, uh, in executing, uh,
their role, uh, within ua.
And I refer to passages from that,
uh, treaty settlement.
And those acknowledgements by the crown contained in
that settlement, uh, are acknowledgements by the crown
that the crown acknowledges the,
who were fully in charge of their own affairs in 1840.
The Crown further acknowledges that it promised that
would retain and
that various crown acts
and emissions since 1840 of undermined the t
that is our right to exercise our self-determination
and decision making over our states and our lands
and, um, the socioeconomic, uh, conditions
of our iwi in the, uh, crown acknowledgements in
that treaty, the crown acknowledges that it's acts
and omissions that have undermined the,
have caused great harm to uni.
And the crown has breached ditch duties under
and its principles in a number of ways,
and it has failed to address the legitimate
and longstanding grievances of the,
as an inappropriate manner for far too long.
The crown acknowledgements then go on to, uh,
talk about forced assimilation.
They go on to talk about, uh, problematic legislation
or policies of the crown in relation
to the natural environment.
Uh, and then the crown goes on importantly, uh, to issue
a full and unserved apology for those, uh,
for those breaches of,
in particular the Crown states that, um,
the Crown Deeply regrets that its policies to colonize
and assimilate Maori into European culture have caused
prejudice to generations of te
Crown policies have contributed
to the socioeconomic marginalization of def
and disconnection from the Maga Maori
and our Tonga, including ua, the Crown apologizes
for its breaches of T, which have tarnished its honor
and brought great harm to Teop.
The crown is deeply sorry for its failures
to protect the tam of te
and the times it is discriminated against te
and the disconnection te
have suffered some from some important parts of, from there.
The, uh, vast crown acknowledgements contained in
that treaty settlement, which I would add took
and the Crown 22 years at a negotiating table to,
to reach agreement on tho on the historical facts
and the crown acknowledgements of the breaches.
Uh, after those acknowledgements
and the apology, there is an important commitment going
forward contained in that treaty settlement
that says the parties agree that
lays an important foundation for the conduct of the present
and ongoing relationship between the parties.
They look forward to building an enduring relationship
of mutual trust and cooperation based on te
We say that this legislation does not reflect
either the crown acknowledgements of the massive amounts
of breach and harm that have been caused by, uh, conduct
of the crown historically,
but any commitment going forward to implement
and respect the of is
rendered Len void by the presentation of this legislation,
which effectively means
that the redress mechanisms then negotiated at the, um,
in the body of that treaty settlement are unable
to be operationalized.
We contend that this furthers the dishonor of the crown
for 186 years
that has been acknowledged in the treaty settlement
that was initialed, uh, in
September, 2023.
We are less than two, uh, full years on from, uh,
from those arrangements being made.
And the crown has already stripping out the scaffolding on
which vital redress mechanisms were negotiated by this iwi.
And there is an expectation
that when the Crown puts those in a treaty settlement,
they are able to be honored, they are able
to be operationalized.
And this categorically is not the case with the presentation
of this, uh, legislation in its current form.
I'll hand over to my colleague Natalie,
who may have some further points in that regard.
Um, so one of the things that is important in terms
of the settlement in particular is that at the heart of
that settlement is a framework.
The framework, um, that speaks to
and was deliberately designed to sit within the RMA
and it's made up of multiple strains.
So it includes, um, Ana, an articulation of Tet values,
hapu planning document, relationship agreements, um,
freshwater governance mechanisms,
and enhance participation in planning processes.
And each one of those strands of
that settlement was carefully negotiated with the crown
to form an integrated.
Um, but these bills sort
of don't just pull on the one strand, it sort of seeks
to unravel it entirely
because the purpose of that settlement
and those negotiations was really clear.
It was about weaving the au
voice into resource management planning
and decision making within the, in a significant way.
Um, the reforms proposed in this bill though, sort of have
that opposite intention and move in the opposite direction.
IE they centralized decision making reduce local discretion
and narrow the ways in which Maori relationships
with the environment are recognized.
So in doing so, they're creating really
and fundamental irreconcilable between the settlement
and its intention as well as the proposed new law.
We are also deeply concerned, um, with the clause
that settlement issues can be addressed later
through settlement or through equivalency negotiations.
That approach misunderstands the nature
of settlement commitments and it seeks to try
and retrofit agreement
and trust into a structure
that's being unilaterally changed.
So that's problematic in a number of ways,
but it's trying to get settlement integrity sort of
and fix the problem after the fact, um, in a context
where true equivalency does not appear possible, uh,
based on how the bill currently stands.
And we've given specific examples in our submissions about
how the deed doesn't easily translate over, uh,
into the new, uh, planned legislative environment.
Even more concerning is
that this legislation is being advanced
before those issues have been even properly worked through,
uh, with affected iwi.
So the bill's undermine a treaty settlement
that was negotiated in good faith
and overwhelmingly ratified by the iwi,
which does raise broader questions about the durability
of treaty settlements themselves as they deserve
to be honored, not shifted without consent
by changes in the legislative tide.
We also point out a number
of other concerns in our submissions.
One is that the bill bills remove the existing treaty clause
from the treaty well from the resource management framework
and replace it with much narrower participation mechanisms.
They also centralized planning direction at a national
level, leaving fewer opportunities for hapu
and communities to shape decision making, uh, in their own.
So for an iwi like Nu whose responsibilities are deeply
place-based, that represents a structural reduction in the
tanu ability to care for
and influence the environment, there's also likely
to be significant unintended consequences by the current,
um, proposed bills in that they're likely
to create a legal mess in a litigation storm, particularly
around these, um, ma legal issues, um,
which could undermine the very efficiency, um,
that these reforms are seeking, uh, to achieve.
So with that, I might throw it back to Dale
for any final comments,
Just letting you know that we've got quite a few questions
here as well, and we don't have that long, much longer.
I think we could probably hand it over four questions.
Our, um, central thrust of our submission on top of the,
the sort of detailed more technical aspects
inside our written paper, which are, are complex and,
and we invite you to, to unpack those
and, uh, for us
to spend further time alongside the crown working out
how they, um, how they're impacted.
We have really tried to focus on some
of the larger principled, um, aspects of our, um,
and our submission today in terms of the verbal presentation
to the, to the panel.
Um, but to say that, uh, as both Natalie
and I have alluded to, there has been substantial
almost generational work gone into the ANU Treaty
settlement, uh, and positioning.
And, uh, during the, the course of those negotiations,
we spent a lot of time talking
with the different Crown ministers
and departments about future proofing that settlement
to ensure, uh, that it could survive into the future
as a framework for, uh, the,
and the crown to realign what's been a really problematic
treaty relationship to date.
And, uh, it's smacks of bad faith that this is, uh,
while this, this settlement is in its relative infancy, uh,
the crown are, um, moving the goalposts.
Uh, and that's, that's seen as a, a massive step back on
that treaty settlement and the relationship.
Um, and we do consider the nu settlement does consider, um,
the constitutionality of that by the crown.
Look. Thank you very much Dale and Natalie.
Look, we've got time for just a couple
of questions We'll go to pre first,
Uh, then ua thank you for, um,
your submission laying out the concerns really clearly.
Um, note your request that the committee recommend
that the bills don't pass.
If they do, however, do you have specific clauses
that you might wanna suggest that would allay
or go somewhere towards allaying the concerns
that you've laid out?
I think our primary concern would be to have the, uh, area
of interest of def our ancestral territory explicitly
excluded from the legislation
because we have a bespoke, uh, agreement that looks to, uh,
have its own arrangements in place.
If that were not possible, then we would need to
halt any implementation of that regime over the territories
until an agreement with our consent is reached
with the government about how these provisions
that we've negotiated will effectively be translated
and, uh, and modernized into a newer
regime and a check.
Then a sense check by
that those will deliver the outcomes we've negotiated
and that will likely require a full re ratification process
by our Iwi members
who have already approved the treaty settlement
that the crown put into their crown offer to us as an
Thank you. Thank you.
And Ana,
Um, mine is a brief mehi to you both for bringing clear,
succinct a and rebuttal of the legislation
and its impact on Nu as you've pointed out.
And because you're in your infancy of, um, treaty settlement
and you've outlined the years of work that you've, um,
put into being honorable in the way that you've articulated.
Uh, we've just recently had, uh, an inquiry into
how the Crown Honors Treaty settlements
through the Auditor General and the report came out clearly
that there's significant work on the crown side
to do a good job
and to demonstrate honorable Tonga the carve out
that you recommend in terms of the way that
NU needs to protect.
Its, its Tonga, its resources
and people, um, really upholds your, your, you are coming in
with your treaty settlement
and you are waving it at us saying
we signed it in 2023. Um,
This, I'll just get to The question.
Gonna get to the question and it's a mahi, um, the,
the challenges a crown to the crown.
What with te mana, uh,
what is this irreconcilable like?
Is it a broken relationship now because of this legislation?
Because you're so entrenched in RMA matters whanau? Oh,
To be clear, the negotiated space that, uh,
resulted in the, uh,
treaty settlement was a compromise space in terms
of the current opera ability to operationalize our rights.
We have parked in the treaty settlement
with the Crown larger constitutional discussions,
which is the full space of the implementation
of our self-determination.
Uh, but the Crown have never been ready for
that discussion at a,
at a treaty settlement negotiation table, as you know.
And so we wait for the courage
and the maturity of the crown to have
that discussion at a later point.
That will be the full realization of that we would hope.
Uh, this, uh,
redress within the treaty settlement was an incremental step
towards that and to stop the harm that was being caused
to our people and our territories in the current regime.
Now what I will say is that Tanu, um,
have sat at different crown negotiation tables,
not just historic treaty settlement,
but inside, um, the reforms for the RMA processes.
We were instrumental inside, um, some of the shaping
of the Mecca
and TA legislation inside these reforms
as they previously sat under the last administration
and dragged through from our treaty settlement, some
of the conceptual underpinnings, um, like the phraseology
and, uh, bringing into ang that those, um, mechanisms
that were negotiated inside the last round
of RMA reforms when the goalposts were last shifted
were at the table trying to agitate
and trying to ensure that there would be greater ability
for the Crown to honor its treaty obligations,
not just in regards to our wei,
but in regards to, uh,
resource management across the country.
And that elevated Teo is a primary responsibility
and, um, that would be lost in all of this,
of course, um, as well.
Look, Kiara, Dale,
and Natalie, thank you for your submission this morning.
We have met time, but we appreciate you talking us through
that and your feedback.
So thank you. So we now move
on to our next submitter to,
and, uh, they're joining us online just coming
through, right?
Good morning, Tara.
Welcome and Sam to the select committee this morning.
Oh, there we go.
Morea, We can see three of you Moderna.
Uh, you've got 20 minutes with us.
Uh, do take your submission as read, uh,
but we'll hand it over to you to talk us through it
and then we'll open up the questions.
So thank you.
My name's Sammy. I'm the group chief executive for Nu uh,
and we are here today obviously
to talk through our submission.
Um, assuming as you've highlighted it has been read
and understood, I thought I would just start by saying for
I represent, uh,
and we wanted to go through the submission today
and some of the points that we wanted to highlight in terms
of some of the challenges.
Uh, money put by no means is against the modernization
of the resource management system
and the benefit it can have,
but not to the detriment of our rights
and interests as our treaty settlement.
I think It's important to note that we administer
two treaty settlements.
We also have a money put to environmental management plan,
one joint arrangement, joint management arrangement
with five surrounding councils
and one relationship agreement
with the three Southern boundaries.
In the current form, the bill will breach our treaty
settlement redress arrangements.
And this is the part we strongly oppose
the process to development.
The, this bill for us was a little bit unsettling.
We've come into it at the highest level
of good faith engagement between ourselves and the crown.
And we've repeatedly sought, um, to have
that collaborative approach.
But I think it's a little disingenuous
to produce a bill when it's ultimately given
to us two working days before the review of the proposal.
So it was provided on the 4th of December,
and it was introduced on the 9th of December.
This timeline does not really constitute the highest level
of good faith engagement.
The bills total almost 800 pages,
and we got two days to go through it.
We have two settlements that are deeply en en engaged in
this process, yet we got two days, even though we were given
guarantees in our own settlement, that this would,
we would get a, a sufficient amount of time,
and by sufficient, I would assume, maybe two weeks a month,
but to be given two days, I dunno what was expected of us
to be able to produce anything other than a response
that says, well, we can't support it in its current process.
The protection of man treat settlement for us is as a must.
We've had our settlement since 2022
and 2012 for the Y Park component.
As you can see, we're now trying to work out
how this will influence us.
We're unwilling to compromise on our settlement.
And I think that's understood
as it is now part of the law of New Zealand.
As our, as it has been completed,
the bill proposes a transitional period of two years
for Manto and the Crown to agree on alternate arrangements
where, um, these two bills will look for ways
to address Otto's needs.
But at the end of that, if it's not addressed,
we have to take what's given.
And the real challenge is that we do not, um,
feel that this can be done.
And if we can't reach an outcome where it is acceptable
to both of us, we can't work it out.
So then we end up having our needs not being met.
I think with nui, um, we are asking that the committee
recommend they do not proceed
with this bill in its current form.
We should have been given an adequate amount of time
and opportunity to address our concerns prior
to the bill being introduced.
Our expectation is that the Crown will engage
with Manto directly as treaty partners.
Uh, and this has not been met.
So without detracting from the overall submission,
I guess we're gonna, I'm just gonna step
through a couple of the key points.
The YP RIVER Act
and our broader treaty settlement redress provides under the
manal settlement claims, a unique set
of statutory mechanisms, including relation to tu.
Uh, that's the vision and strategy that enable Manto
and the Waikato River Iwi to exercise a high level
of influence in decision making in
the resource management system.
So TUMAN is one of the most significant
planning documents in New Zealand.
Uh, for us, there are strong interactions
between Otto's treaty settlements arrangements and the RMA
and its planning and consenting process.
Uh, in particular though,
our settlement redress is built upon
and relies on the foundational provisions
of part two of the RMA.
These provisions are absent from this bill.
The part two provisions of the RMA are replaced in the bills
by, uh, the Maori interest goal.
It's clause 11 of both bills.
The Maori interest goal is a weak, is weak,
and it fails to really provide substantive protections to,
uh, of man otto's rights and interests.
Maori interest can ultimately be
traded off against other goals.
So we've, the relief that we're seeking is
that we have made some recommendations that paragraph 48
of the submission as to how we can, um,
this clause should be strengthened to provide
for stronger substantive protections in respect
of Maori interests, which align more closely to, uh,
with the, um, six and seven of the RMA.
I think it's clear as we go through this,
we're not just providing our challenges, we're also trying
to give ways to pro, you know,
to provide relief to this challenge.
So we, we've come up with a problem,
but we also want to consider that we've tried to provide
what we think is reasonable, um, workaround so
that we can come back together.
The treaty clause at, um, at clause eight of both bills,
again, the treaty clause is different from the weak
and is weaker than, uh, the original eight of the RMA.
It narrows treaty obligations
to a defined list rather than applying a broader duty
across the whole system.
So that we are looking, we've recommended at paragraph 50
of our submission that Clause eight is amended
and broadened its scope to require persons exercising powers
and performing functions under the act to give a factor to,
um, clauses nine
and 10 are inadequate in the current
treaty settlement provisions.
The commitment is the bill to provide equivalency
to a treaty settlement redress
to the greatest extent possible in the new system,
is a conditional promise that leaves the possibility
of the diminishment of man treat settlements.
This is absolutely an unacceptable outcome for us.
We strongly oppose any diminishment
of our current settlement rights.
The transition, the transitional provisions must provide
sufficient flexibility and sub, um,
substantiality modify the standard position in the bill.
So where necessary to give effect to
OL's treaty settlement legislation.
We have made recommendations, paragraph 56.
So hopefully those written submissions as to
how the treaty settlement provision should be amended
to ensure the full intent of the integrity
of money treaty settlement.
Um, sorry, I'm just kind of mowing through this,
but I want to provide time for questions as well.
The bills move influence upstream into the national
direction and early planning.
This has the effect of making local stages less able
to correct national settings that do not align
with the treaty obligations or, or his specific realities
and changes the points of the money, uh,
at which money portal can engage.
It'll be critical that there is meaningful engagement
for money put in designing
and developing the national policy direction.
National standards and regulations to,
to define sit sits currently
above the national planning instruments,
and there is no connection in the new document, uh,
with the 35 minutes.
So the removal means that we've lost the ability to sit
between the two, uh, which is a challenge.
We're concerned with the permissive consenting
framework proposed under the bills.
Uh, that'll significantly narrow the ability for money
to participate in development proposals.
This will ultimately have an impact on the scope
and effectiveness of TNS jma.
We have Jo Joint Management Agreements
with Y Kato Regional Council, y, Kato, district Council, y,
PA y, and Ang.
Um, we do not oppose some streamlining approaches we're
appropriate, but this must be clearly carefully balanced
to ensure that our integrity, intent, and effect of our JMA
and statutory provi, um,
acknowledgement provisions are upheld so relief.
So we, we've made a number
of recommendations at paragraph 69 of our submission.
So we hope that's taken into regard.
The introduction of a regulatory relief framework creates
the potential significant financial burdens for councils
that they will have to manage.
Uh, this may disincentivize that the inclusion
of planning controls in the regional planning documents
restricting land use in order
to protect Maori rights and interests.
And it may have the effect
of casting a negative light over those rights and interests.
I guess I'm doubly concerned here.
One, the councils will be forced to push cost onto, uh, the,
the consent applications.
And also we will be highlighted Maori
and will be highlighted as the cause because of this change.
And there's been no real, um, opportunity for that
to be rectified.
So the regulatory relief framework requires major reconsider
considerations with clearer statutory guidance on the
purpose, scope, and application of the relief framework,
including explicit recognition that the protection
of Maori interest may be justified proportionate limits on
the individual land use.
Uh, and then we've got the resource requirements
to iwi and hapu.
Um, and the transitional phase
of operational phase will be extensive.
This must be accounted for in a specific bill provision and,
and its, and its success of budgets to ensure
that the reform succeeds of relevance to us
nui, uh, and a**l.
Here we divided into three regional council boundaries.
So we'll be drawn into three sets
of regional planning committee formation processes,
for example, and resourcing this to effectively participate.
This is particularly important in this context.
I guess I bring it all back to the fact though, that we
have always had the understanding in our relationship
with the Crown that they would work
with us transparently and openly.
When we asked for the bill, it wasn't
provided when we asked for the draft, it wasn't provided.
And then two days prior to, uh,
on the Thursday we received it
and it was submitted on the Monday.
So I just, you gave us eight, 800 page document,
asked us to review it against two settlements,
an environmental management plan,
a joint management agreement,
and a relationship agreement
with specific councils in the region.
And we tried our best to try to work in that timeframe,
but it's just absolutely unacceptable and we refuse that.
That is a meeting, our current agreement and a settlement,
and consider this an actual breach of its own.
Right. So there are certain parts we've gone through today.
We're open to questions.
I hope this has been informative to yourselves
as we've tried to approach this with what the problem is
and what we believe a reasonable solution could be.
As we said at the beginning, we're not against the idea
of modernization of Resource Management Act
or the bills that come from it,
but we can't do that at the cost of our own people.
We represent 56,000 Iwi members
and we've been fighting for the 165 years
before the claim became a reality.
So we're not about to start now.
Um, saying thank you for the fact
that you've somehow substantially removed that in,
in the sections that we've highlighted today.
So open to you.
Thank you for your time, uh, honorable members
and, uh, yeah, open to questions.
Thank you, Sam. Look, thank you, Sam.
And look, I do just wanna acknowledge your submission
'cause it is a, it is a really well laid
out, um, submission.
It's, it's very clear to us, um, with some, um, you know,
very clear considerations there.
So thank you for that.
Uh, look, I might just kick off, um,
because I was quite interested in some
of the comments you made around regulatory relief.
Uh, it's come up kind of over, uh, again on this, um,
committee through the hearing process.
Just wondering if you could give an example of
how you think this could specifically negatively impact.
Um, and have you, have you got any examples where you,
you feel that if it was implemented in the way it is now,
how that could negatively impact?
I'll throw to Tara first and then come in
and provide my perspective at the end.
Oh, Thanks, Sam. Um, I guess the way the concern
for man, uh,
and I'm, I'm sure some of these concerns have been voiced
by others, is that what it really does is once you get into
that planning stage
and you are considering the appropriate planning controls,
um, the risk is
that it disincentivizes putting in place those planning
controls that look to protect Maori rights and interests.
Because ultimately, the financial burden of, um,
of those controls then falls upon the council to meet.
And so it really puts pressures in those particular
processes, um, at, at the outset.
And we can't see how those concerns are mitigated, um,
in the current, um, bills as they're drafted.
And so some of the recommendations that we have made, um,
in terms of reconsidering that framework, uh, is
that there are, you know, clear legislative, um,
almost exclusions
or at least exceptions in terms of allowing councils
to make those or to contemplate those, um,
particular interests when they're then
going on to develop plans.
Um, so that they are almost, you know, anticipated in terms
of how that relief framework would would work.
We are not saying that the, the framework as a whole should,
should come out that we do think it needs
to be majorly reconsidered
because there just doesn't seem to be, um, uh,
a clear purpose or limits around it.
And so it leaves a lot of that
to be determined at the point at which regional coun
what councils will be, um, considering a whole bunch
of things, not just Maori rights and interest,
but you know, another a a number of other matters
as they go into, um, planning.
Thank you, Tara, for that clarification.
Um, LAN has a question.
Koto, thank you so much for your submission,
and I think we are all noting
and are quite horrified
by your experience that you've been describing.
Um, my question is around, uh,
ministerial influence in this new framework,
which we've heard about from a lot of submitters,
but I, I wanted to, uh, ask whether you were aware,
and apologies if I've missed it in your submission,
but that, you know, this, this whole new, I guess what
is often referred to as the funnel approach,
where the rights
and consultation are really limited at
that more like consenting and, uh, phase.
But the idea is that everyone, you know, gets their,
say at the national level when, when ministers are,
are making direction at that other part of the funnel.
Um, my question is, are you aware that, uh, iwi, hapu
or settlement groups, um, even those
that may have the ability
to be consulted at the national direction point,
um, are actually exempt.
They don't have to be consulted in that first round
of ministers actually setting the direction.
Do you have any comments on whether you'd like
to see changes with that?
It's a, it's a great question.
I was first something out there
and then I'll have Tara actually try to tidy up
what I'm about to put out there.
But from my perspective, all of that is the work
that's currently going on
by the people proposing the current bills.
But our settlements are there
and we're here to talk about those.
And in our settlements, we already have
that mechanism to be included.
So the fact that it's a removal is only highlighting the,
what we're trying to do here today.
It's our ability to be included
or incorporated into those levels through
to two define money and through our settlement agreements
means that those things shouldn't be happening without our
consultation and that we can't be skipped.
But if that section two is removed, then we lose all ability
to even have consideration for these conversations,
which is why we are here to defend, uh, our II's rights
and the fact that we have a settlement agreement.
It is a legal document that's currently law
of the land in New Zealand, and we want that upheld,
but to find out that it's being removed
and then being promised to us at some point through, uh,
a tool that's gonna come
through the national planning tool system
that doesn't incorporate our ability to have any say to
what you're proposing is a little bit of our challenge
and what we're saying that can't happen,
we won't allow that to happen.
So, Tara, just anything further?
Yeah, I guess, um, maybe I'd put it this way is that
I think what's unfortunate is that reform
of this kind always presents an opportunity for Maori
to come to the table at all points of the system.
Um, and I think what you can see in terms of how those, uh,
the national directions
and policies stand, uh, instruments are developed,
flowing right through is
that it is a completely missed opportunity.
Um, not, and, and I think that's sad for two reasons.
One is because as Sam's, um, being, uh, made clear is that,
you know, this is, we consider a direct breach of
what the agreements
that mania UL currently has with the Crown.
Uh, they should be sitting with the table, um,
as should other iwi and hapu at, you know, various points.
And, and that opportunity is ms.
But I think it's just a tragic opportunity in terms of
how this, uh, regime will ultimately play out.
Um, and when we are asking
that those instruments set the appropriate direction
for the entire system, it is fundamental
that the right people are at the table developing them.
And I don't see how you get that when they're not there
and that they're not required to be there.
That should be in the legislative framework.
Look, thank you. We've got time
for one last question from Grant McCullum. Yeah.
Um, thank you. Thank you for
very, uh, thorough submission.
Uh, question around,
so you talk about if you got the framework right
where you had involvement at the right level,
would you see then the need to be involved at the,
at the actual consenting level for individual businesses or,
or households or whatever, you know, whether it be farming
or whatever the case may be?
Uh, do, because that, that seems to be, um, that, that,
that's a question that I've asked of others.
I just in your view, please.
Yeah. Yeah. I appreciate
the opportunity for this question.
We said at the beginning,
we're not against the modernization of consenting process
and making it more so they can be transformative
for New Zealanders in its totality mm-hmm.
But not at the cost of our settlement.
So, do I have an issue with houses being built? No.
If it's being built over spaces of special significance
to us, then we're gonna have a challenge.
But that's what we're trying to say is right now we have
that ability to have that influence
and use common sense to help councils go forwards.
But what we lack right now through this bill is the ability
to have any say because it's being taken out of it.
So yeah, we, we are absolutely open to the notion
of modernization, but we definitely can't have anything
that goes explicitly against our current settlements.
Thank you. Look, thank you very much
for your time this morning,
and as many members have commented on a very good thorough
submission, so really appreciate your time.
You're welcome. And we do want one last consideration.
We are seeking immediate response from the Crown
around its definition of, uh,
and good faith relationship
regarding the two days we were given to respond.
But it's absolutely unacceptable
and we want it noted that
that in its own right is a breach against our ability
to uphold our relationships with the Crown.
And we do wanna response from the crown, please.
Okay. Thank, thank you for that feedback.
We've, we've noted that. So thank you.
So, uh, moving
to our next submitter is the New Zealand Maori Council who,
uh, with us here this morning in person.
So Morena, welcome to the, uh,
select committee this morning.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us.
Uh, take your submission as read,
but we'll hand it over to you to talk us
through the main points and then open up the questions.
Thank you. Uh, good morning select committee.
Uh, just before we start our submission, we were told, uh,
as we came in of the passing
of our marvelous queer from Na Perot, Tina Tilly Re
and we'd like to recognize her
before we start now, sitting here
before you today, I am Don Hall.
I am the secretary for the New Zealand Murray Council.
And accompanying me is Dr.
Betson Martin, who heads the research arm of the Secretariat
and Robin Wright, who is our expert.
And he really is, uh, experienced in the area
of resource management law with a very wide background
of representing hard cases for communities.
Going back many years.
Behind me is the workhorse, uh, dash
and from Woodward Law,
who has helped put the submission together.
The New Zealand Maori Council
was established under the Maori Community Development Act in
1962.
That makes it 64 years old.
So the legislation that authorizes us to sit here
is older than everyone around this table, and except for me.
Uh, so with that age, with the age
of the legislation goes the legacy of expecting that's,
we've learn some lessons by surviving to here.
So the act has many components to it that are
overdue and have been subsumed by time and technology.
But the core fundamental principles that set up that act
is that it came about
after serious negotiations at an honorable level
with Maori communities.
And it was completed in 62.
So I heard the previous submitter say
that, uh, they wanted their treaty, uh, obligations
to be, uh, protected and observed.
Has anyone got a tissue? Sorry, I've just got a, oh, thanks.
Oh, there's some there. Just beside the front. Thank you.
Uh, wanted their treaty,
their treaty settlement obligations are met.
Now, most of these groups that are making these submissions
represent what's called post settlement governance entities.
Their history might go back 10 years.
Uh, we are talking a 62 year history here,
and the negotiations that took place
to establish the Maori council were held
with Maori communities based all over the country.
And what this act did then and continues to do today,
and no other entity legislated
for in government can do it, is it has
a legislative authority to advocate the interests
for all Maori, all Maori.
Nobody else can do that.
That's not to say it talks all Maori
because you've got groups turning up here,
post settlement governance entities that are really capable
of speaking for themselves.
And I want to specifically refer to Dale, Natalie
Coates, who were on as we walked in.
Uh, they'll have really clear understandings on
what the am Mai communities need, uh, just heard from,
and same thing.
But what none of these groups can do
that only the Maori Council is empowered to do, is
to ensure that the interests of all Maori are met.
And this legislation deals with interests at a
national level as well as at the very important local level.
And that's why, uh, chair, the submission
that the Maori Council brings forward really needs
to be given appropriate ways.
So the submission has got two very good
speakers to speak to it.
Rob will follow me. I will come in, uh,
and assist him when he comes
to address a specific request we have to make
to include the Maori communities under the Maori
Community Development Act.
Uh, but following Rob, uh, Dr. Martin,
and then we'll take questions.
Thank you. And morning, um, uh, I'm going
to address you on two key issues.
The first is the exclusion of Maori associations
from the representative participative role,
and we proposed a simple amendment in the, um,
machinery provisions.
Section three of both acts to address that.
Um, and the second, um, relates to the problem of
mandatory provision on the one hand for sites
of significance to Maori
and the requirement for regulatory relief on the other hand,
where provision is made in, in the spatial and regional
and district plan for land use plans.
So, um, I also have two short comments
to make on sections nine and 10 of both bills.
Um, so just dealing with the first issue, um,
as you've heard the context here, um, is
that the crown does not override treaty settlements
by any side wind and should not do so here.
As Donna has just said, this is possibly one
of the most longstanding legislative interventions
by the Crown dating back to 1962, um,
in terms of the Maori Community Development Act.
So, um, we should not leave it
to a legal argument in court later about whether it was
implied intention by Parliament to exclude or, or include.
Um, so we've suggested a fairly simple
what we've given you a one pager just
'cause we know time is pressures here, um, as our suggestion
to introduce a new definition of Maori association.
Um, obviously it's simply constantly preexisting definition
section two of the 62 19 62 act.
Um, and then, uh,
because, um, it's critical that there is the opportunity
for, um, engagement
and participation in the consultation processes.
Um, we've suggested that, um, it the, um,
Maori associations have parity of status
with the Iwi authorities.
And that's again, the simplest way to ensure that when,
when you go through the national instruments
and the spatial plans
and land use plans, there is that opportunity for
pre-consultation, um, with, um, the Maori Association.
So we think it's hopefully elegant, always simple, simplest
as BS one council legislation.
That's our proposal for you.
Um, I just wanted to on that point, answer a question
by, um, Mr.
Callum on, on the, um, whether it's necessary to have,
you know, engagement consultation on, um,
bespoke projects like
what we currently call resource consent
applications or designations.
And probably the short answer to that would be it's,
it's gotta be context related.
So there's gonna be a whole bunch of proposals
where it's totally inefficient to
seek consultation at the Iwi or hapu
or Maori association level.
But there are obviously large scale infrastructure
projects would be a key example.
We know it's appropriate and the way the, um,
legislation's addressed that, you know, sort of more
or less, um, approaches in a nuanced way.
Um, but we don't wanna be excluded, um, in terms
of the money associations from that opportunity as well
as the planning regimes themselves.
Uh, so that's the first, um, topic
and we've given you suggestive wording.
Um, the second topic, um, as you know, um,
the goals in section 11, currently in Section 11 one, um,
you know, just bring my copy to end, um,
include at 11 F to provide for Maori interests
through a participation b identification
and protection of sites of significance.
So the focus here is on F two, identify and protect.
So there's a mandatory requirement to identify
and protect on the one hand,
but on the other hand, if you do,
if at the council level there are,
there is an identification of protection of sites
of significance, then you trigger regulatory relief.
And we say there's a fundamental inconsistency
or problem with that, um, from, from a council perspective,
because they're gonna have to,
you are essentially gonna delegate down to councils a lot
of litigation around, well, should we be, um, identifying,
protecting Wahi tap, um, some of the most important sites,
um, for Maori wahi tuna, um, on the one hand,
but what, how are we gonna address that
by way of regulatory relief?
And we say that's creating a fundamental tension.
And if we can address the problem now rather than leave
to the courts later, that would be sensible and prudent.
Um, and so we have, um, proposed, um,
in the submission, I could take you
to page 18 of our submission.
Uh, in, we've, we've tried to get by way of descending order
of preference because we appreciate it's a big, it's,
it's important political issue, the question of beliefs.
So the simplest way
of doing it obviously would be simply get rid of
regulatory relief and instead replace it
with the RMA approach, which was about, um,
reasonable unreasonable use of land.
Um, so go back to essentially the way we dealt
with it in the RMA where, um,
if a change in zoning introduced an unreasonable use
of land, the landowner could seek compensation.
That's worked really well.
So it's the question for you,
and I appreciate the philosophical question as well
as do we really need to go there with repertory relief?
But if you're not, um, comfortable with that approach,
then we've suggested a carve out approach, which is
that either, um, when it comes to sites of significance
for Maori, they are carved out.
So there is no duty on councils
to address regulatory relief having regard to the, um,
the crown's obligations under the Treaty two to Maori.
So that would be our
alternative approach, the carve out approach.
Um, and then we've also given you in Paris 6.6 to 6.8,
um, some other suggestions, for example,
at least allowing councils the opportunity to have regard
to, um, the importance of materiality of, um,
impacts on Wahi tap Wahi tauna at, um,
at the front end stage so that, um,
you're not creating this regulatory relief problem at the
backing stage once protections are in place.
And I just wanted to emphasize
otherwise, we are taking a significant step backwards from
the position under the RMA.
Um, we've had 35 years of, um, implementation.
And the example that comes to mind is,
or council where, um, originally it had identified thousands
of potential sites significance to Maori.
Many of those were taken out on the understanding they would
be introduced later, hasn't if it happened
through the unitary plan.
But the point being, um,
there's still a lot of work to be done.
Um, and if you were to require re regulatory relief,
it makes it really hard on, at the council level to say,
well, if we want protect certain wahi, puna wahi tap,
how are we gonna deal with problem
of compensation to landowners?
Um, so you are gonna create a big problem here in
my respective submission.
Um, so those are the two topics I
wanted to address with you.
However, I just wanted to draw your attention finally to,
um, sections nine and 11 of both, sorry, section nine
and 10 of both, both bills.
The first relates to, um,
essentially a transitional arrangement
where the crown has up to two years to implement, um,
treaty settlement redress and, and try
and endeavor to make the the bill both bills consistent with
that over a two year period.
My question for you is query, query, why two years only?
Is that gonna be enough time to deal with that?
One would think a little bit longer, might be sensible.
Also query why it's limited to, um, PSGs.
So why are you limiting it only
to PSGs is another reasonable question to ask
where you're trying to deal with, um,
transitional arrangements to endeavor to create consistency
with settlements, including deed of settlement,
not necessarily just settlement legislation itself.
So that question for you.
And the second one is around, um, section 10 again
of both provisions, which, um, requires, um,
which, um, it is hand and glove with section nine,
but I don't understand why you have 10 bracket three.
This section does not apply in relation
to statutory acknowledgement.
It seems odd that statutory acknowledgements are really
important, uh, particularly for, um, settlement legislation.
So this is where you identify particular talent in the
environment of importance
or wahi tap to, um, particularly where you hapu have settled
and there's a really detailed process you have to go through
to identify those in the first place.
Why are we carving them out?
Doesn't kind of make sense to me.
So, um, that's all I had to say. Thank you.
Thank you. I'll just take a moment
because, uh, I think question time will be valuable.
Um, we, we've had a ongoing theme
with t kaha, um, regarding the resolution
of Maori rights and interest.
Mm-hmm. And we, um, in particular want to,
will just mention the issue of allocation, uh,
which is an issue of Maori rights and interest.
Uh, we see that first and first served,
or as don to say first in best dress is, um,
retained in this.
And we're very concerned about that, uh,
because, uh,
and it also makes provision for market-based allocation
through regional council,
but both of those serve to exclude Maori
from any entitlements.
There's already through over allocation, uh,
Maori have been sidelined from access to allocation.
But I think the details of that, uh, in our submission,
so just to highlight that
and, um, to mention property rights,
which are very oriented to individual
private property owners,
and the whole issue of collective ownership needs
to be much more fully thought through and addressed.
Um, so actually we've always considered that a formation
of a national Maori entity would assist with
working through these processes
because they're not just easy to solve in a few sentences.
So that's a suggestion.
It's not really in the legislation,
but it's a suggestion of
how these complex issues might be much better addressed.
And, um, just back to, uh, Donna's point about,
um, the New Zealand Maori Council
and the provision for Maori associations,
I think we've pointed out,
or we have in here that, uh,
actually a high percentage
of Maori don't live within their iwi authorities.
And so that's in particular where the Maori council
and the 1962 legislation is very helpful.
So, um, I think it's just to come back to that key point
because questions, um, we'll go into questions from there.
Yes, we are running outta time much.
We've got a couple of questions.
So, um, thank you very much for that submission.
We'll go to Lam first.
Koto, thank you so much for your very fulsome submission.
Um, I wanted to invite you
to comment more about the private, private
property rights aspect,
which we hear a lot about with these bills.
But you raise in the submission the fact that a third
of Maori land, for example, is actually landlocked
and isolated, and
that the access issue is not addressed in these bills.
Can you expand more about what, what you are wanting us
to hear with that, raising that at point?
No, no, no. Yeah. Um, yes.
So, um, sorry, I I was a bit distracted.
I just need the, the question,
Sorry. It was just the,
the whole premise of the bill is about, oh,
the property protecting, sorry.
Yeah, yeah. Private property rights. Yeah. Yeah.
And how does that relate, for example,
to Maori as landholders?
Yes. So there were the two components.
One is obviously under the RMA, we had a,
essentially a public domain viewpoint on as well as private,
um, property rights, both were important.
Um, but you were, in terms of five sections,
five 16 sustainable management, there was a consideration
of, um, public values in, in, um, such as scapes, et cetera.
Um, and, um, we've got a, a narrowed down function,
particularly for regulatory relief around how was, um,
rezoning a landlords land
with wahi tapu over the particular aspect with the river,
you know, the, the boundaries to a river that go
through their property or whatever.
Um, how is that going to be compensated?
So that brings it down
to the narrow understanding of property rights.
Mm-hmm. Um, and we would say that, um, you,
there are also other ways of consideration
of property rights, communal, communal perspective,
which is a hapu based perspective generally. Um,
It also covers multiple landowners.
Now, the Tai Kaha collective has put in significant
submissions on exactly this.
Mm-hmm. Uh, big land trusts property, right.
Owners are not given
the same recognition as ii.
Mm-hmm. Now we've come in here as the Maori council
and put forward the Maori associations,
but the other side of that equation is the Tai Kaha position
of the Federation of Maori authorities.
They represent the largest group of Maori property, right.
Individual owners in the country, and they're not included.
Mm-hmm. And we are supporting, we are part of T kaha
and we are supporting that recommendation.
This is very important that it's got, right? Mm-hmm.
These are the property rights of Maori all over the country
where there is Maori land still.
And just We could get back
to you in writing on the issue of landlock land.
Mm mm-hmm. If that's helpful, that would be great. Yeah.
Thank you. Look, I just had one quick question on the
regulatory relief because I'm interested in your solution
that you provide here, um,
where you say it could be excluded relief, uh,
where specified rules recognized
and provide for wahi tap, wahi, una and tribal timer.
So do you feel that that is, um, from your point of view,
e enough protection
and consideration to the cultural sites that could, um,
potentially present themselves?
Yes. So, um, the example would be, say, um, QLDC,
which has a wahi una, um, zoning overlay in its plan.
And to some extent, um, for example, the boundaries
of rivers, um, 20 meter on each side, for example, um,
a landowner who's got land there might have to consider, uh,
what types activities are appropriate within
that boundary, just as an example.
Um, and so what we are saying is there's, it's appropriate
to have a carve out for ma um, sites of significance
to Maori, um, independently of the other topics
because of the crown's duties
and obligations to, um, its treaty partner.
So carve out is a justified, um, principle approach.
Okay. No, thank you. Thanks for that clarification.
Look, thank you very much for your submission this morning,
a really thorough submission, um,
and traversed a lot of areas.
So, uh, we appreciate those considerations
and, uh, your time this morning.
So thank you. Thank
You. Thanks very
much. Chair,
could we get some here in here?
I dunno.
Look, we now welcome our next submitter, uh, who
are all here in person, uh, forest and bird.
Welcome, Erica
and Richard, uh, to the select committee this morning.
Uh, look, you have 20 minutes with us, um, you know,
take your submission as read, we'll hand it over to you
to just talk us through the main
Points And open up the questions.
So thank you
Ko, chair Koto, members of the committee,
and thank you for the opportunity to address you today.
My name is Erica Tolman.
I'm the acting CE of the Royal Forest
and Bird Protection Society.
Our is independent voice for nature.
Since 1923,
we have over 100,000 members and supporters.
I'm joined today by my colleague Rich K
and Sally Jet, who has been providing advice
to forest virgin bills, forest
and Bird supports reform
that enables well located development and infrastructure,
provided that it also delivers real environmental
protection and enhancement.
The bills need significant amendment to achieve that.
Forest and Bird has been involved in a huge number
of planning and consenting processes under the RMA today,
we are going to focus on what Floret
and Bird sees as the critical issues
that require your attention
and which may not be covered in depth by the submitters.
We have recommended solutions
for these issues in our written submission,
and I urge you to read that in full if you haven't already.
We, and we're happy to engage further with you
or officials, um, in any detailed points.
First, I'm gonna start, um, with a couple of points just
to set a context onto the next slide.
I'm not gonna read out the slide.
Um, so our economy
and wellbeing depends on well functioning ecosystems.
It's not a nice to have. Sorry, what number slide are we on?
That's the second slide that we're talking about. This one.
Sorry. We should have numbered the slide context on that.
Correct. So supporting people
to enhance nature is important,
but we will not maintain biodiversity if
we do not protect what's left.
We cannot rely on public conservation land as it's alone,
as it's not representative.
It does well at protecting ecosystems
that are not very useful for humans,
but it doesn't do well at protecting the most threatened
lowland habitats.
So habitat on private land is critical for biodiversity too.
And this doesn't just mean discrete areas of bush
or well delineated wetlands, areas that are degraded
or human mod.
Human modified can still be really important
for biodiversity, such as the dryland ecosystems
and the McKenzie Basin.
So just to reiterate, supporting people
to enhance native ecosystems is really important.
However, it's not a substitute for regulation
to prevent habitat loss in the first place.
So the bills are remarkably quiet on a few crucial matters,
and climate is one of them.
We've covered that in detail on our submission
and won't go over it today as lots
of other submitters are covering that.
Um, the bills don't have a lot
to say about New Zealand's coasts and oceans either.
Biodiversity underwater is just as important as on land
and can be impacted by a wide range of activities.
From dredging to seabed mining to fishing
resource management planning, consenting is vital
for sustainable marine management.
Now, just to check, we're all on the same, sorry,
I should have said next page.
Um, so the top picture there
is a thriving marine ecosystem at the four knights.
The bottom in contrast is an area
of canna barons at mim funta in 2021.
And that was caused by overfishing of snapper
and crayfish that would otherwise predict the canna.
So this, this picture was taken prior
to the Northern Regional plan rules controlling fishing,
that coming into effect,
and those rules were enacted under the RMA.
So I'm now hand over to Sally.
Erica, I'll just, um, uh, start on the next page
that's just headed by diversity with the beautiful picture.
So it's great
to see a specific biodiversity goal in
the national environment, bill.
Um, but forest and Bird does have some concerns about
that goal being premised on no net loss.
Um, this essentially builds ongoing loss into the system
because a, a no net loss outcome is accepting
that there will be some loss and some gain.
But when that is then balanced against other goals,
it is essentially acknowledging
that there will be a net loss of biodiversity.
Um, we've noted
that the UK has adopted a statutory net gain, um,
goal for development.
And so we see no reason forest
and birdies, no reason why
that same approach couldn't be adopted in New Zealand.
Just some other issues with the goals.
There's no goal for wetlands, um,
and there's nothing, uh, about,
and the goals about significant natural areas.
And no net loss goal doesn't protect either of those eco
that doesn't protect significant natural areas or wetlands.
Um, it also really doesn't work in marine environments.
It's, it's not a concept that has been developed
with marine environments in mind.
Uh, next slide. Biodiversity.
You, you will have heard a lot about the, the, the,
the approach of splitting into two bills.
Um, biodiversity is something that, that has
to straddle the two bills
and the way it's being done at the moment means
that there are some significant gaps.
Um, so significant natural areas need
to be shown in spatial plans,
and that is a, that's a really great, um, thing to see,
but there's no goal to drive the identification criteria
and so on of what is a significant natural area
and how should it be protected.
So there's just that lack of the top down, um, guidance on
what, what that should be, uh,
effects on the natural environment can't be considered under
the planning bill, but that's where the,
the land use aspects of, of this whole system are managed.
So there's a disconnect between the way
that the planning bill deals with, uh, the built environment
and the, the natural environment bill deals
with the natural environment
and the way in which biodiversity falls
through the gaps there.
Uh, there's no requirement to map wetlands in spatial plans,
so that seems to be a significant, um,
a significant emission.
Uh, and the relationship, this is a, where forest
and bird understands the limits based approach, um,
that's being proposed under these bills.
But the, the,
the way in which biodiversity limits will operate
and the, the relationship
between significant natural area protection
and biodiversity based limits is very unclear
or is completely, it's completely silent in the bills.
Um, all I want
to say about the regulatory relief provisions is,
is a similar point to the, the speaker from mania port,
which is about the chilling effect that that
regulatory relief has the potential
to have on identification
and protection of, um, biodiversity areas.
So Forres Berg would like to see further thought put into
how to ensure that that chilling effect doesn't occur.
And we have proposed some
suggestions in the submission on that.
Our next picture, our next slide, sorry, is about landscape
and natural character limiting protection under these
act under these bills to outstanding landscapes,
risks major unplanned
and unmitigated impacts on other landscape values.
And I expect you'll hear more from the Institute Institute
of Landscape Architects about that later this morning.
Um, that is a significant concern.
Another concern is that spatial plans are not required
to map high natural character areas,
even though there is a goal for the protection
of high natural character areas.
Um, again, with both landscape
and natural character under the planning bill,
only impacts on the built environment are relevant
to land use consents.
But what is a landscape?
Is it part of the built environment that is,
it's very unclear whether it's captured there.
Uh, there's also one point that is not covered in forest
and bird submission, um,
because we didn't pick it up until later.
It's buried down in Schedule 11 of the planning bill,
and that is the immediate changes that the bills would make
to section 1 0 4 of the Resource Management Act.
Section 1 0 4 is the,
the primary consenting provision under
the Resource Management Act.
And the bill makes, um, changes
that would exclude a whole raft
of considerations from being able
to be taken into account under the Resource Management Act
under section 1 0 4.
The concern is that none of the work has been done
through spatial planning and so on, yet to ensure
that we are relevant.
Those effects have been built into the system
through the spatial planning.
Instead, they're simply excluded from the day
that these bills pass from being considered.
So I'd urge you to have a look at, uh, part one
of Schedule 11 of the planning bill for, for
where those transition, those changes
to the RMA are set out.
Uh, next slide is about setting limits
and development within limits,
which is a very important topic.
Um, limits can be very effective at managing cumulative
effects if they are set and implemented well.
The ecosystem health limits purpose is
to protect life supporting capacity
that's strongly supported by forest and bird.
It's a, it's a well understood term
that we've been using in the Resource Management Act
and in the National Policy Statement for a long time.
Um, the, so that's, that's good to see.
Um, but that there is a concern that if social
and economic considerations are built into limit setting,
we are not going to have limits
that are appropriate in terms of human health
or the natural environment.
So social and economic considerations are absolutely
relevant to the time that it takes you
and the methods you use to get to the right place
to get to where they need to be.
But they shouldn't be relevant to where you set the limit.
Um, timing is an issue.
Limits are set after spatial plans have been prepared.
So the pattern of development is locked in
before limits are set.
That risks not achieving limits.
Some of the, uh, aspects of the bills that relate to
how the, the risks, uh, for ensuring that use
and development stays within limits are the permitted
activity classification at the moment.
Um, there's a requirement that, uh, an activity can be,
or the, a principle that an activity can be categorized
as a permitted activity
for which no consent is required if the activity is
anticipated or if its effects can be managed.
So that is a major concern
that an activity whose effects are not well understood
and cannot be managed can
nonetheless be specified to be a permitted activity.
Um, that's in clause 32 of the natural environment Bill
Diffuse farming discharges.
Um, we've listened to some of the presentations from some,
some of our, um, our colleagues in the, the farming sector.
Um, there is a, a concern that some
of those submissions have sought.
The diffuse farming discharges should not be required
to comply either with limits
or shouldn't be subject to resource cats.
Um, freshwater farm plans are a really important tool
for on-farm environmental management,
but they don't replace a consenting
or a, a regulatory context that drives
reductions in contaminant losses,
particularly in over allocated catchments
that are not currently achieving environmental limits.
So it's really important that
where farming is already operating at best practice,
freshwater farm plants are not going
to drive further improvement beyond best practice.
And it may be that more is required. Okay. Next slide.
Um, just to touch briefly on planning processes
and participation, given the important role
that national policy direction
and national standards play in this whole system,
it's really important that those documents are,
and that they achieve the best outcome possible for
as many industries, people, communities
and environmental issues as they can,
because they have such major implications for all
of the planning documents that sit underneath them.
But that takes time
and it requires meaningful opportunities
for people to have input.
In contrast, the short submission period, the lack
of provision for testing of evidence, uh,
like there would be in the environment court, the lack
of independent scrutiny
and the vast ministerial discretion mean that decisions at
that national level are likely to lack an evidentiary base,
cater to a few interested parties, uh,
and potentially lack durability.
The maximum timeframes
for preparing these planning documents are too short,
especially for spatial plans,
which have such a heavy load to carry.
They've got to identify all sorts of, um, industry, uh,
and, uh, and infrastructure
and environmental features, and that takes time.
Why is there such a focus in these bills on excluding
interested parties from participating in planning
and consenting process?
Improvements can be made without arbitrary,
without this arbitrary focus on whether someone is a
qualifying resident of a district or region.
Many of New Zealand's environmental features are
nationally valued.
Do we really say that only people in Southland are
interested or should have a say about
what happens in Milford Sound?
For example, forest
and birds been involved for decades in, uh,
advocating at the regional
and the district level for protection of habitat
for appropriate environmental limits for fresh water.
That is a benefit to, to the New Zealand system.
It should be being recognized
and celebrated, not seen as a flaw in the system that needs
to be legislated away.
Uh, last couple of slides.
Um, water conservation orders, just a quick plug
for water conservation orders to remain in the bills.
They're really important tool.
They've been described, um, as a private plan change
for a river, just as we allow private plan changes on land.
This is a tool that recognizes some water bodies need
special protection and they should be retained.
They have an important role. Next slide.
Wildlife permits, um, just, uh, to note forest
and bird's concern that the bills provide for
wildlife permits to be decided by regional councils instead
of the Minister of Conservation.
There's no scaffolding around that.
There's no assessment criteria, there's no goal related
to wildlife protection.
There's nothing to guide that decision making.
And forest and bird would say that the Minister
of Conservation is the right person
to be making those decisions, not a regional council
that doesn't have that in-house expertise
in wildlife management.
Uh, next slide. Last slide. Rules about fishing.
Now, just the excerpt that is on that slide is from the, um,
select committee's report back in two thou, uh, 1994
on the Fisheries bill 1994.
And I've produced it to refute the submissions
of several groups who've said to you
that it was never intended
that the RMA would control phishing
and that there is an overlap.
Because if you look at
what the select committee said back in 1994,
it said the current interface, which, which
provided, which didn't include certain environmental matters
in the Fisheries Act,
that current interface reflects acceptance
that phishing like other activities,
can be curtailed under the Resource Management Act
and other statutes on the basis of effects on matters such
as intrinsic and amenity values.
That's how the Fisheries Act was written.
It left it to the RMA to control phishing
where it was having localized impacts on biodiversity
and other important local values.
Um, and so if you remove the scope
to control phishing from the bills,
as some submitters have asked, this will leave a gap
that the Fisheries Act does not fill
and no remedy where fishing is having significant
unsustainable local impacts on marine biodiversity like the
Ken Barons that Erica showed you earlier. Thank you.
Thank you for that very thorough submission.
Uh, so thorough that we have very little time for questions,
but, uh, we will, uh, make the questions relatively quick.
We'll go to Grant first. Yeah.
Um, just I'm intrigued by your no net loss of biodiversity
and energy where you made the comment, um, uh,
that the under the, well, that might be the goal,
that the way the act is put together
will actually lead to net loss. Can you elaborate on
That, please? Sure.
So the, the goals are the, the, the bills are ex,
uh, explicit that the goals do not need
to be achieved in all places at all times.
And so, and there's no scale at which
no net loss is to be achieved.
So, uh, and the bills also provide for conflicts
between goals to be dealt with
through the national planning document.
And so if there, if it's anticipated
that there will be conflicts between goals,
that means there will be some goals that what, that,
that weigh more
or that, that, that end up winning over other goals.
So if you're starting with a net outcome
and then you are putting another goal on top of
that outcome, there isn't a loss outcome results.
Thank, Thank
You. Thank you. And Priyanka,
Thanks. Um,
great submission. Thank you.
Um, also just acknowledging Nicola as your outgoing C
and the work she's done, um, just very quickly, the point
that you made around limits
and limits, you made the point that social
and economic considerations could be relevant
to the timeframe, but not the limit in itself.
Can you just expand on that? Yes, certainly.
So, at, at the moment, the way the bills are written, they
appear to assume that limits will be set in a way
that aren't currently being breached.
In reality, we know that to have meaningful,
in particular water quality limits, it's likely
that they're going to be set at a level that
some areas are currently exceeding, such as the,
the groundwater in Southland example that's been,
um, prominent recently.
Mm-hmm. So how you get back to a limit, how you,
how you ensure that you transition
to towards achieving a limit.
Um, the social
and economic impacts of
that transition are absolutely
relevant to take into account.
But do we really want to be setting a limit,
not based on whether it's safe for human drinking water
or safe for the fish to swim in,
but based on how we think socially
and economically, we want it to be set.
That seems a very poor way to set something
that we are calling an environmental limit.
Thank you. And Cameron,
Yeah, it sort of, it is a suck bit off that, um,
I first acknowledge, thank you for bringing the fishing, uh,
parts of the RMA to the committee.
That's, that's important, but it's upping off
that it's a look, I mean, you might, you,
I take it you would agree that, you know, system has
to prioritize or protects, right?
And we have to be able to provide for, um, we balancing
that against growing food and building infrastructure.
I mean, how doesn't that mean there needs
to be some flexibility in environmental limits?
I mean, how, how would you go about doing that?
Well, isn't the purpose of these bills to provide for use
and development within limits?
And if we, if we're saying within limits,
but then actually the limits are already going
to build in some use and development into those limits.
We are not really talking about
use and development within limits.
We're talking about use and development beyond limits.
So the flexibility comes in
how you manage things within limits. Yes. The
Question is how, where, yeah, and
you're right. Where is the limit then?
Mm-hmm. So, well at the moment that the, there's a process
for providing for those, and there are purposes for those
and that there's the human health, it's easier probably
to think about it with the human health limits.
We know what sort of limit for, for a particular
contaminant is acceptable for, for human health.
So do we, do we really want to have
that being potentially changed
or downgraded from where it needs
to be scientifically for human health reasons?
Because socially and economically we don't want to,
or we, we don't want to achieve that outcome.
So what, so, so what I'm hearing say is
that the limits need to be set to take into account all
of these items, including, uh, all these goals,
human health limits, including provision of infrastructure.
I think, um, plan
and provide for infrastructure to meet expected demand.
The limits should be able to take
that into account. No. If you're saying, okay,
No, no, that, that there are biophysical limits
that the na that, that the natural environment
and human health can deal with, those aren't negotiable.
We can't, we can't simply negotiate away the level of e coli
that people can have in their drinking water
because we want to provide
for more runoff from a stormwater system,
for a nearby, nearby subdivision.
We need to set the limits in order
to achieve appropriate human, scientific, human health
and ecological outcomes, and then provide for use
and development within those.
Look. Thank you very much.
Look, we're gonna have to leave it there
because we have met time,
but, uh, we appreciate your very thorough submission
and the PowerPoint to talk us through
very good highlights as well.
So thank you very much. Thank you very much.
That, um, brings us to the end of this session.
We will have a break now and resume at 10 45.
Thank
review, uh, our public hearings
and we welcome, uh, classic developments.
And I understand, um,
you are also doing Templeton Developments.
That's correct. So, so, so both submissions this morning,
um, are represented.
So, uh, we welcome you to the select committee. Thank you.
Um, you have 20 minutes allocated for the,
the two submissions, so if we wanna work that together or
however you want to present it, we'll hand that over to you.
Um, and if you just, uh, start by talking us through it
and then we'll open up for discussion and questions.
Thank you very much. Now my name's Bill, er,
I'm a partner at Simpson Gress,
and obviously I, uh, act for classic
and I for Templeton, um,
and help them with land development, uh,
throughout New Zealand.
And, and in addition to that,
there's also the Russell Property Group
and, um, life care residents who
we filed submissions on behalf of.
They're identical to the ones that are TED today.
So we just note that they're, uh, also part
of the discussion we're going to have.
So I, I thought we, it's with your leave.
We would combine, we won't repeat, um, we'll sort of use it
as one time slot and just go through what we want to say.
The only thing before I hand over to, uh, Mr.
Cooney, who's a director of basic developments,
was to say that Mr.
McKenna, who's the founder of Templeton, is unable
to make it today, um, but of he's overseas.
He would've liked to have been here, but can't.
So the first thing is just to hand over to Pete Cooney and,
and he can give some context
to why from a land development perspective, um,
these bills are so important.
And then that gives context for the discussion I'd like
to have with you around the changes we are gonna suggest.
Thanks, bill. As Bill, I'm a director
of the classic development, uh, entity.
We've been going for 30 years.
We're one of the largest residential building companies.
We're also one of the, the,
probably the largest residential
development company in New Zealand.
And we also have a joint venture partner, uh, ship
with the New Zealand Superannuation Fund.
And the reason I say that is, uh, we sit here
with some experience when it comes to the pitfalls
of the RMA and some
of the pitfalls we see coming up in the new proposal.
Um, so look,
we've got some really large scale developments going
on, uh, currently.
And you know, what developers need during this time
is certainty that we can continue
investing in these projects.
Um, and there are many examples which gives us, uh,
nervousness that this may not be allowed
to happen in some form of continuity.
So there, there are two main issues with this bill
that really, uh, that we wanna point out.
Um, the first one is the ministerial powers of intervention.
Um, and that means every cycle there's a, uh,
a government change.
Then there's a, uh, different direction
that the ministers may head.
And there needs to be some form
of independent oversight onto this.
We can't have a changing every three or four years.
These are big scale developments that can take 10,
they can take 15 years to do.
And if you start changing it partway through,
then we are not investing.
It's really simple. We can't afford to,
we can't afford to take that risk.
The second issue I have is the ability, uh,
to do away the existing provisions
and the district plans, which we're currently relying on.
And for the same reasons these projects are 10, 20 years.
If you, you come out now with a new bill
and it changes everything.
We're halfway through these large scale developments
and we're in serious trouble.
And I'm gonna give you a couple examples of some
of the pitfalls with the RMA process.
Um, and these are some
of the things you need to take into account.
We are involved in a project called Tar Rico West,
which is 4,000 sites in the Bay of Plenty.
We bought this land 10 years ago.
We, it was a council driven plan change, uh, financed by us,
partly, uh, partly by council due
to the lengthy delays in changing the urban limits,
the introduction of new national policy statements,
the MDRS, all these things that came along
nine years, it has taken us to open up a piece
of land in Taronga that every single council wanted
because we were starved the property.
It was as a biggest increase in house prices throughout
New Zealand was in the Bay of Plenty.
And we've still got a shortage today, nine years.
We're finally doing earthworks after nine years.
And this is due to the intervention of politicians,
as I say, national policy statements retake council
interpretation of the national policy statements, uh,
the water, uh, natural hazards.
Uh, it was just an absolute minefield.
And so therefore, when you're doing a regional spatial plan,
you gotta be very careful that you actually get it right.
And there can't be any changes
because it stops people like us making large
scale investments.
Um, and,
and the, just just to give you an example,
another example is Walkworth.
We went through a plan change,
and this is a classic example of what's happening
around New Zealand
because we develop in all the tier one cities,
and we're right throughout the country.
We have 5,000 sections land bank either being developed,
consented, or going through fast track.
But here's a classic case of going into open council.
As experienced developers, we sat down
with every single council member, uh, every planner,
I should say reserves, et cetera.
We sat down with a UT, we sat down with wastewater
water key, I should say.
Everyone gave us the green light to go ahead.
They didn't have any issue
with the plan change we're proposing in walkworth.
Walkworth has been designated as being one
of the major growth areas of Auckland.
And they gave us the green light.
So we spent a million dollars plan.
78, was it 78, 79 came along while we're doing this,
we lodged for, at the day, we lodged for consent.
Water care changed their mind.
We spent, the council spent another year
before they would take it to a hearing.
And it took us three years to go to commissioners who proved
that we were correct and it was justifiable
that the lands should be rezoned.
And we proved that we could provide our own infrastructure.
So one of the key things here,
when you're doing this regional spatial planning,
that if you set that in concrete,
every single council is gonna go,
we are gonna process this according to infrastructure
that we can afford.
There must be a scenario
where private infrastructure or plan change can be presented
and put forward on the basis that
a developer is gonna provide that infrastructure.
But if you wrap it down again into council
dictating the terms and how it can be rolled out,
then you're gonna have some serious problems as far
as growth is concerned,
because there's no council in this country
that's got any money to provide infrastructure.
Walkworth was a classic example
where we were providing the infrastructure,
but we still got caught up in the red tape with water care.
So these are the, some of, some of the fundamental issues
that are happening right around the country.
And it's, it's absolutely comes down
to council's interpretation.
So when you're doing these regional pla spatial plans,
you need to be very clear as to
what you're trying to achieve.
And you've gotta allow developers to achieve that.
So that's, so the key things for us in this new bill
is that there's gonna be certainty at national level.
Direction won't be changed at the
whim of each new government.
That's critical. It's really absolutely critical
that you can't changing it.
Tart Rico was a classic case of a minister coming in,
deciding that he didn't want any new roading.
And this is state Highway 29 that serves as the port.
Um, and that just put a kai wash on the whole thing.
Clear opportunities for the development community
to have sufficient time to provide meaningful
input at each stage of the plan making process,
including into the national level direction
infrastructure planning.
In the RSP, I've seen some really terrible planning
by councils
who planners think they know better than developers as to
where and how infrastructure should be built.
And if you don't get the expertise at the table,
you're just wasted your time.
Flexibility that allows
for viable private infrastructure solutions
to service development where the public system cannot
deliver a solution and time
and for private plan chains have been made
at the regional spatial level, which is
what I've just been talking about.
Certainty for companies like classic
that have invested years of time engagement,
relationship building and financial investment in securing
private plan changes
that work will not be lost when the current district plans
are replaced by the land use plans.
So I'll probably sum up there,
but just be aware that there's a lot going on out there.
Bringing in a new regional spatial plan
that's gonna override everything is gonna be a
very dangerous exercise.
I'll pass over to Bill to sort
of get into the technical issues.
Lucky me. Um,
and I would, would sort of notice a preliminary comment.
We've suggested some solutions, uh, in our submission,
but they're not the only way to achieve,
um, what we want to achieve.
And reading the submissions of others, listening to some
of the presentations, there's some very good ideas out there
about how we can solve these problems.
So I'm not, um, uh, obviously it's up to you to,
to recommend, um, the solutions.
But our attempt was just one possible option, I suppose.
And I thought I'd start on a positive note to say
what we do support, um,
'cause there is a lot of good material in here.
Um, we do it very much support the goals, um,
that are in clause four to 14 of the, the build.
That whole issue of, um, around the goals
around economic growth, um, around infrastructure, uh,
creating sort of well-functioning urban environments.
Well, I would note as a, as a court is already noted that
that's, there's something for everyone in that mm-hmm.
And how you define what that is.
Um, so you might wanna think about
how you might then articulate
what a well-functioning urban environment actually is.
Um, I think there's a, there's a,
a real benefit in acknowledging that there must be
sufficient land supply.
That's a very important aspect of this bill.
But from my perspective, what I have seen is, uh,
it needs to be real.
It can't be an academic exercise of land supply.
It can't be an exercise in saying, we've zoned all
of this land, therefore you have land supply.
It's actually got to be one, two things.
It's gotta be something that the market
and the developers like Pete want to develop
because they know it will sell.
And that's really important. Mm-hmm.
Um, and it's gotta be feasible from an infrastructure
perspective, which I will get into.
So it can't be, land supply is not an academic exercise.
It must be a real exercise where the market will buy
and where the, there can be servicing of, um, of the,
of the housing and, and we'll
talk about private in a minute.
We also support the removal of special circumstances,
which was always a catchall
for note in terms of notification.
It was always just the excuse to notify something.
We very much, um, support the change in the threshold
for notification, you know, from the,
anyone adversely affected.
Um, no more than minor to more than minor.
I think that's a, a, a good a move in the right direction.
Um, we, there there is the provisions around allowing
and district plans
or land use plans to say will now be called, um, temporary
and future focused, um, zoning.
So in other words, an acknowledgement in the provisions
that if certain infrastructure is built,
housing can then follow.
Um, and so that's a good step forward.
There's, um, narrowing of effects.
We think that that's a good thing.
Um, removing of present effects, uh,
all those internal issues of people living in buildings
and balcony sizes
and all that sort of, um, material that now is excluded.
That's good. Um,
because I don't know, Pete, an enormous amount
of time was spent, um, arguing about the sizes of balconies
or, um, the number of car parks
and all of those things, which at the end of the day,
people will either choose to buy that house
or their own apartment or they won't, the, um,
standardization of zoning is a good thing.
But we will, as Peter's already alluded to,
there's been a lot of work already done
with bespoke provisions
and we don't want that work to be lost.
And so I'll talk that through in a minute.
Um, and then a topic
that I'm sure you've had much discussion on is
that regulatory relief.
Uh, and the only thing I'm gonna say, yeah, uh, yeah,
the only thing I'm gonna say about that is that, um,
there was always, in my mind anyway,
when looking at plan changes an element missing in the
analysis, which was what is the impact
of the plan change on the person that owns the land.
Mm-hmm. And all this really en now enables is for that
to be part of the equation.
And that is important. Um, you can't ignore, you know,
Pete owning massive chunks of land and,
and someone coming in and trying to do something
that restricts development.
The impact on him has to be part of the equation.
I'm not saying it's the complete,
but to completely have to ignore it as we do now is, um,
frankly, um,
I suppose unacceptable really
from a land development perspective.
So they're the things that we, uh, think are,
and there are many others, but they're sort
of highlight package in terms
of what's heading in the right direction.
So now we can get into the things
that I think require some improvement
and a theme that you've already gleaned from, um, what Mr.
Cooney has said is certainty. Mm-hmm.
To in order, as we've heard, these investments that, um,
land development companies make can be from
probably a minimum of five years
before we start, you know, doing something and,
and actually getting a return to 10 years or longer.
And what we've really said with these,
with these large scale land development is the goalposts
have been constantly changing over a long period of time.
Uh, and, you know, some of the developments
that we've been doing, um, have, have suffered from that.
And it's a, I think if, if you'd known as a,
a land developer that all these challenges were coming down
the track, you probably wouldn't
have invested in the first place.
And I think that's what Pete's saying, that you, you,
you need a certain level of certainty in order
to make these long-term investments.
And there's a couple of ways
that we see the bill could be improved
to give that certainty.
The first of which is, um, the, the level
of ministerial intervention
and, uh, I think it was the property council,
or it might've been Udin, suggested in their submission
that there should be some buffer.
There should be an independent way of assessing whether
what the minister or the current government is
proposing is a good thing.
And it should be assessed on an evidential basis
with possibly hearings having to occur so that
the implications of what might be suggested
by the minister can be tested.
And people like peak can have their say,
can be a truncated per, you know, process.
But I think it's important that that lens has put over, uh,
the changes that, that come out on
that every three year cycle.
Hmm. And that will give a certain degree of comfort,
the development community,
that at least there will be some form
of scrutiny rather than the politics of the day.
And I know that's probably an unpopular submission to make
to, to, you know, um, mps.
But, but I think it's really important from a,
from a certainty perspective.
The other, um, certainty aspect was the, the,
you can, you've already heard, um,
and we spend a lot of our time investing a lot of PE
and other developers money in trying to get these bespoke,
um, plan changes which enable
development throughout the country.
At the moment, the bill does not reflect
or in any way acknowledge those
investments that have been made.
So there's nothing in the transitional provisions,
there's nothing in the bill that's, that
recognizes the investment that has been made over many years
to get these plan provisions in place.
It's, it's almost as if it's proposed
to just have a clean slate.
Let's start again. That does not work from a certainty
perspective because, you know, to rico,
you are now investing millions of dollars, uh, on that.
And suddenly in two years time,
there might be a regional spatial plan that's different from
what, um, you've achieved through to rico.
So our suggestion and our submission and,
and to you now is essentially to, um, have a
explicit recognition in the bill that says
the starting point should be what has been,
what is in these district plans, these bespoke provisions,
whether they then get all the way through to the
regional spatial plan and the land use plan will be up
to the decision making processes.
And they will be assessed against the goals of the act
and the bits of those bespoke provisions
that achieve the goals of the act will survive.
And the bits that don't will not survive.
But at least the starting point,
starting point is a recognition of, of
what has already been achieved
and what people like Pete are relying on
to invest millions of dollars.
And that's not just Pete, it's all
of our clients are the same.
Um, you know, Beachlands, I'm sure you've heard
of Beachlands, um, already, uh, there are different walk
with south, uh, all between,
whole lot of queenstown developments.
They're all in the same place
where they are currently being delivered.
And we can't have those precinct provisions,
those bespoke provisions thrown out, um,
without a proper starting.
So we've got these, let's not lose them.
Let's see how the standard zonings fit.
Let's see how, uh, the national environmental standards fit.
Um, sorry, that's the wrong terminology,
but you, you get the concept of what I'm trying to say here.
We need to start from a proposition of
what we've already achieved and what we've got.
'cause investment decisions are being made.
So that's a really important one from, uh,
I think the development land development
community. Definitely.
Yeah. I think, uh, one other thing to, to bear in mind
as well is, and we've had it a lot in the past,
is when you're doing these regional spatial plans,
be very careful not to lock 'em in and be too Ted.
'cause the market changes. It varies overnight.
We've seen it right now where price increases by 40%
vertical just doesn't work at the moment.
Plan change, one 20 is great, let's go up.
Nothing's going up. No one's going up.
'cause it doesn't financially stack up.
You're building a product that's here in
your markets here, it's not working.
They'd be very careful about keeping regional
plans too rigid.
There's gotta be flexibility in it has to be, 'cause trends
and markets change every five to seven years.
Perfect. Segue into my next point.
That was, that wasn't scripted.
Um, the, the first thing, the first thing is, and
before we get into the flexibility
around regional spatial plants, the first point is that the
national directions, the regional spatial plan
and the land use plans are critical documents.
They're very important. And I think on the pedestal,
I would put anyway, the regional spatial plan, the,
the timeframes in the bill as it currently sits,
both in terms of when the councils have to deliver them
and in terms of how well people like Pete get
to have their say, are too short.
When you think about there's going to be, um,
regional spatial plans all done in tandem at the same time
throughout New Zealand, the resource just does not exist.
Um, for people to have their say meaningfully in terms
of the timeframes that they're suggested in the bill,
I fully commend, um, fast processes,
but too fast will mean the quality
of the product at the other end won't be what we need.
So the balance has to be struck between
allowing sufficient time for councils to do their,
what they need to do in terms
of their regional spatial plans.
And then for people like Pete to make their submissions so
that at the end of the day, the pilot
that comes out the other side is a good one for everyone.
MDRS is a classic example.
It's rushed, it's wrong, should never be there,
should never have been done.
And this is what you can't do in this regional spatial plan.
So let's just talk about the regional spatial plan.
Um, I I'm sure you've had a lot
of submissions about the importance of this document.
Um, and I, I guess at a, from an architecture perspective,
it's probably the bit that's been missing,
um, for a long time mm-hmm.
In RMA. So we, we support it.
Uh, but again, it has to be done well.
It has to have the time to be done well,
but more importantly, there are two things from it.
The one is once it is set in stone, that 30 year horizon for
that plan with 10 year reviews, um,
if it could never be changed other than by the council,
that is a massive problem from um,
a land development perspective.
As Pete has just said,
things can change literally overnight.
People's desire on a to go up
and buy apartments suddenly evaporates.
And you cannot, the, the regional spatial plan potentially
stop all flexibility.
And that is, um,
frankly a real disaster from from
providing housing in this country.
Yeah. Good example again, example is,
that was in Taronga in 2005 we promoted, they had the lakes,
Cameron, you be fair, the lakes,
they predicted they would last taronga for 30 years.
I argued that it'll lasted for five years
and a boom, the boom came, it lasted five years.
Now we're caught short. Now we've got no land.
Now it's taken nine years to rezone.
So as Bill says, don't, you can't lock it into stone.
You've gotta have flexibility there.
And the way that that can be achieved is
to allow private plan changes.
And I know all councils in New Zealand will,
will say this is a bad thing,
but for the reasons we've just explained, you have
to be able to change the regional spatial plan
and the land news plans together.
They will otherwise they will lock us into
to nothing essentially.
And so we urge the change that we are urging here is, um,
plan, private plan change,
or whatever you wanna call them, changes, private changes
to the regional spatial plan and the land use plan.
So at the moaning, the bill provides for
that change to the land use plans.
But we need also to be, um, for the regional spatial plans
and look, no one's trying to argue
that it shouldn't have full rigor.
Uh, and it will, um, it will be a rigorous process
and it will be no doubt, um, hard fought,
but the appropriate ones will get through.
So we shouldn't be scared of allowing the regional plan
to be changed, um, at various times.
Part of that is also that um,
the regional plan is drafted essentially by the council
and it will be based on their funding of, of
what they say they can build in terms of infrastructure.
And that's fine. But the other side of the ledger
that's missing at the moment in the bill is an explicit
recognition that in certain circumstances,
private infrastructure can also do the job.
And so, you know, what was south was a classic where we had
to pivot quite quickly when we were told there was no
wastewater and water supply
to working out our own solutions.
And the technology now, and the,
and I won't bo you with this,
but in terms of the wastewater, uh, the technology,
the number of houses to make that technology,
the wastewater technology work is,
is getting smaller and smaller.
You know, even back when we were talking at Walkworth,
it was sort of 1200.
Now it's getting down. But well below that, in terms
of private infrastructure that works, that does a great job.
That that actually, funnily enough, the discharge has
to be put back into wetlands to make it dirty enough
to be released, um, back into the environment.
'cause it's that clean, you know,
the technology is really getting to that point.
And that was what we, the technology we were
using at Walkworth was that.
So what I'm asking for there on behalf
of these clients is firstly explicit recognition
that regional spatial plans can also provide, um,
acknowledge and recognize, probably recognize
as a better word, private infrastructure
can be a basis to allow growth.
Um, and secondly, as a result of that, when we can,
as the development community can establish that some,
even though, you know, it might not be a growth area,
we can show that private infrastructure can service it,
then it should be allowed.
And that comes back to my point, you need to be able
to change these regional spatial plans.
Thank, thank you.
Are you um, I'm just letting you know that um,
we've got a lot of questions. So, um, well see
We've got the two slots. Yes.
We well into
Them. We're well into it.
We we're well into, yeah. So yeah. Okay.
Alright. So there's final points that perhaps you wanna make
and then we can open up some
Questions. We've done that I'm actually near at the end
anyway.
Um, permitted activity regime, there's some having
to register them and all of that stuff.
You've probably got that one. There's nothing wrong with
a permitted activity is a permitted activity.
People, the current RMA acknowledges that
and allows you to get a certificate compliance.
If it is, um, that should be the regime.
No reason to go into the registration
and asking effective people and et cetera.
So that's, um, that's that one times
Is it. Brilliant.
That's probably enough from us
and we'll let you ask us lots of
Questions. No, thank
you very much for, uh, those submissions
and you know, for giving us a practical insight of
how all this is implemented on the ground.
Um, look, we've got lots of questions.
So we will start with Grant McCollum. Yeah,
Thank you. Thank you very much. Um,
I can relate to this to a degree.
I've got a developer kit.
He's trying, he think he's about year seven
and there's still not a solid turn.
They're trying to get a proper plan, a plan change done just
so they can, so how, how crucial what one
of the thing they keep striking is they feel that,
and this is not, uh, taking a shot at anyone,
but the actual ability slash quality of some of the planners
that, and what they know and
and actually can understand, they find really challenging.
They, they, they see that, they don't really understand the,
what the actual technical,
technical staff at times. Do you, strike
That. Let me put it
this way. Um,
when you walk into any council in this country
and I walk into all of them mm-hmm.
The first answer is no. Yep.
That's and that's your starting point.
So there needs to be a real mindset change.
And there's regional spatial plans are about,
yeah, let's do it.
Let's get it done. This is how we, this is
how I would suggest you do it.
But it's a no, it's a flat out, no.
And you go from there and they go down
to the technical side.
And to be honest, most planners
that are working in councils,
and I shouldn't really say this,
but they just haven't got the skillset
to make those decisions.
It's an absolute dog's breakfast right.
Throughout this country. But the mindset has
to change. Thank
You. Thank
you. Look, we'll go to pre anchor.
Um, thank you for your clear submission.
Um, I think you actually answered my question,
but I'll just seek clarification.
So with plan change, one thing for example,
and this is a question that we ask the responsible minister
at the start of this process, your ask there is for it
to be considered as a starting point so that the work
that's been done on it to date isn't lost.
But then it is then compared with the aims
of these two pieces of legislation.
I, I wasn't so much talking about PC one 20.
I, I don't think either of us necessarily think
that's a good thing.
But anyway, I was talking about the to RICO provisions
that Pete spent 10 years trying to get,
I was talking about the walkworth provisions that I,
you know, we spent five years trying to get
and that's the starting point.
It would include PC one 20 as well. It would, yeah.
Okay. But don't get me wrong.
When we bought Walkworth halfway through that,
they brought in plan change 78 and 79
and said, no more greenfield, we're going all vertical.
So it stopped us in our tracks.
Water key changed their mind council changed their mind.
They came back on site eventually when we commit it.
But, you know, you you, you're expecting us to invest.
If you want developments in this country or in this city
and you want housing and you want us to invest
with confidence, you can't go changing af after
The fact And plan change.
One 20 is not too different to that.
A lot of people are gone out and bought land and invested
and all of a sudden they've gotta stop in the tracks.
Yeah. So the confidence goes and
therefore you'll only get piecemeal development.
We'd be very, if this spatial plan isn't the right,
we'll be very cautious as to what we buy at any scale.
So you tend to do smaller boutique little projects
to keep, to keep safe.
But if you want this country to grow
and you want decent developments to be done,
we need confidence and certainty.
Mm-hmm.
This is supplementary to that
because you talk about the time, you know, one
of the developments taking almost 10 years.
But what about the cost?
You know, in terms of the, the cost of the, the litigation
and the courts and the process and do
You wanna put that in perspective?
Yes, I'd Like to 12 million. Yeah.
It costs us for that project to sit and wait
and spend plus another 2 million to contribute to council.
'cause they didn't have the money yet.
It was a council driven plan change. Right. That's huge.
It is massive. It can cost
and dearly cost you your shirts if you're not
careful. Yeah. Mm-hmm.
And, and you know, I heard Auckland Council say that the,
the MDRS PC one 20, it costs them 14 million.
Mm-hmm. So it goes on both sides.
Everyone's put to an enormous cost For what? For it.
Yeah. No, that's a good point. David just had a
Supplementary, sorry, sorry.
It's so Ron, that regional council,
district council iwi, everyone wanted it done.
Everyone was urging it to be done
and it still took nine years.
Mm-hmm. Purely red tape. Mm-hmm.
Um, David had a supplementary just on, on
Top of that. And first off, thank
you very much for the work that you do
because you are part of the solution for some
of the most dire problems we've got in the country.
So thank you for that to begin with.
And I acknowledge the, uh, the risk
and the challenges that you've had,
but looking for solutions moving forward.
So I wanna be very clear, uh, we spoke first
of all about the ministerial powers
and how we make sure that in the political environment
of the construct of New Zealand,
that we don't have this flip flop
nature of what we're going.
So you're suggesting that you need a mechanism
where they must consult people that are,
or entities that are materially affected
by a potential change
or instigation of what they've got
to be taken into account with their decision.
'cause you're not gonna stop a, a, a, a government
of the day to do what they want.
But they're very limited at this,
at this most limited areas.
Actually make sure you can stop.
'cause at the moment they can just go make a
path in this contract.
Yeah. So you need to go ahead with the, with the minimum,
you know, what's been agreed to at, at, at the minimum.
But if you change it halfway through
and say you can't do that now we've based
our whole feasibility.
That's the problem. That's,
that's the problem. What is the
Solution? So the solution
I was suggesting was some
independent entity built into the bill that scrutinizes
that ministerial direction. Yep.
I've always maintained there should be an ombudsman in the
north and the south island that has the power to go in
and resolve it.
Like if a council suddenly flip flops
but you know, we've invested
so much money on a major project, then there should be an
as bill, as an independent ombudsman or someone like that,
or a group that can step in
and take the powers away from that council
and carry on with that project. I
Think you gotta interpret an Oman as being the, uh,
ambulance at the bottom of the cliff. You want to have a
Proactive that needs to make sure it's clear.
That's where it scrutinized from an
evidence evidentiary perspective.
And there was a supplementary there on
that same question line from, yeah.
So, okay. So you are looking
for more the scrutinizing rather than the setting.
Like are you comfortable with the ministerial
Direction? I
I had started from the pro proposition that
that probably wouldn't be something you'd want to move.
No, we want applicable.
So if it is going to be built into the bill, then we need
to have um, a mechanism by which it is scrutinized.
What about for example though, I mean you could use
for example, board of inquiries to set
the national direction across the board.
Yes. You know, like it does not have
to be No, it does not necessarily.
Would that solve a lot of what we're talking about? I
Think it probably would. Yes.
A hundred percent.
Thank you. Um, Cameron Luxon has a primary question.
Thank you. Um, Peter,
you talked about certainty and how important that is.
Um, do you think that there should be a role for developers,
landowners, people in sectors to influence, uh, at the start
of a process of designing a national standard
or a spatial plan?
Because right now it's sort of sitting with councils and iwi
and then the rest of, uh, new Zealanders uh,
consulted afterwards.
Do you think that people sectors actually affected,
should be up front to pre-consultation?
A hundred percent. That's where the
fundamental problem goes wrong.
And another example, tarico
and they, the planners came along
and tried to tell us what density we needed to build.
I'm the one that's investing the money.
I'm the one doing development.
I know the market better than a planner does.
'cause I'm five years ahead thinking what,
where the market's going?
And they're telling me what's happened yesterday.
So sitting regional plans have the experts at the table.
'cause we've got guys that sat down with council
and showed them how to do the infrastructure
and how to solve the infrastructure.
They couldn't work it out. We worked it out for them.
So it is imperative you get
all parties at the table when you're doing spatial.
And if we're able to, and if we were able
to have something like that, and that might, I mean,
acknowledging that you, um, the ability to have flexibility
and plan changes and design later.
But that would limit some of it.
If that pre-consultation part was,
especially with landowners,
One of the suggestions would be
to put a pre-consultation phase
into the regional spatial plan.
So actually requiring that to happen. Yeah.
Um, before you formally notify it in a, in a, so
that was one of the suggestions we had
Developers a solution, you know,
that those solution orientated council aren't,
they don't look at those solutions.
They look at the theory and it's not until we come along
and show them what you can do, but
then by then it's too late.
Oh no, you can't do that because of policy. So and so,
And the framing's been set by that point.
Correct. Yeah.
Thank you. Look, Julianne Genta has a question.
Thank you very much for your submission.
Um, I am guessing, you know, as a private entity,
ultimately your financial bottom line is non-negotiable.
For you as a developer, do you think it's possible
that at times there are broader social
or environmental costs that need to be taken into account
that might conflict with what's in your financial interest?
Or do you think that there isn't a role for the public to,
um, to have that we should just sort of let the developers
drive the spatial planning based on the land purchases
they've made and the ability of them
to make a return in the short term?
I I think that you've gotta understand
that development today.
You know, we take into account the flood modeling.
We take into account natural hazards.
We look at all those issues.
And if you look at any of these rainfalls
that you've had recently, and I'm just going, you,
you look at Auckland and the 17 rains,
not one new subdivision was affected
'cause they took into account storm water, flood modeling.
Um, we take all that.
We have to take all those into account.
At the end of the day, you need housing,
you need housing over people's, you know,
you need roofs over people's heads.
We are there to provide it in the best possible format we
can, but it's comes, everything comes at a cost.
But I mean, do you think that we don't, there's no role
for the public in looking at No.
There's an broader costs
and like, you know, transport costs for example or
Yeah, but again, we take those as a,
as a prudent developer,
we take all those things into account.
We look at the transport route, you look at the, the type
of land that you're developing, um,
you look at the proximity, what amenity is around it,
and that determines the type of development you're doing.
We take all those factors into account.
It's all part of developing, you know, we just don't go
and find a piece of land and go, oh, let's rip this one up
and put some housing on it.
You know, we've gotta take into account
all the issues that you've talked about. So do you think
We just do away with environmental regulation and planning
What all of it and Yeah. And
Its entirety? Is that, do you think
we can do that
because we can just trust the developers
to take into account the broader social
environmental interest? Well,
Well you've, you've set, so you've set some really
stringent rules now through the regional councils
and stormwater and modeling and natural hazards
that we take all those things into account now
anyway. They're already
In place. Or we're
taking that into account because it already exists.
Be because that government, that planning role
and environmental regulation exists is why
you take it into account.
Uh, no. We've taken into account
because we don't wanna build and flood hazards
'cause it's gonna flood and therefore our um,
our development is gonna be,
is gonna go broke halfway through it.
All these factors are taken into account when you develop,
you've gotta take them into account when you develop.
I mean, if we're gonna, we're not gonna go
and develop through natural and wet hazards.
I mean, because we've gotta go and fill that land up.
We've gotta replace that natural hazard somewhere else.
It's just not viable. It's not logical.
Most developers today take a very
prudent view on all those issues.
Maybe we've become a lot more aware of it and the,
and so society's become a lot more aware of it.
But as developers, we are trying to enhance the here areas
that we're developing in developing in Tar Rico.
We're gonna have, we are increasing the natural hazard area.
We're increasing the ponds, we're increasing the walkways
through the rivers for everyone to enjoy.
We're actually adding value to it. We're not decreasing it.
We're increasing it
Supplementary.
Um, do you think though that the problem is
like you are, you are clearly taking a lot
of responsibility, but you say most developers do,
but do you think the problem is a lot
of the rules are put in place for those developers
that aren't actually doing due diligence or whatnot?
Who, who are just getting a bottle land
and putting some houses on?
Like is that where the issue actually is?
I think the biggest thing is we've become a lot more aware
of what's right and what's wrong.
So if you go and look at all the natural hazards
that are happening now and your slips
and that they only areas
that should never have been developed in half those areas
developed, I wouldn't have touched them.
I would never develop underneath a cliff
or I wouldn't develop down a galley.
'cause that's where your natural water hazards go.
I mean, I think the modern day developing,
were a lot more aware of those things.
All your issues arise from 50 years ago. It was too loose.
It's very strict and it's very tight out there now.
And the responsible developers look at all
those issues. Yeah.
But thank you. And we'll just take one last question from
Ryan Hamilton who's been waiting patiently. Thank
You chair. Um, look, just
really a quick question of clarity through,
I think it's been sort of teased out a little bit.
Um, Peter, initially you said regional plans are dangerous.
Um, so we're looking at a model that's going about a hundred
around the country to 17 to try and provide that
and you say submission national, um, certainty
and you know, um, clarity around that zoning.
But if I heard you correctly, you're okay with that
provided there's a flexible mechanism within those
to adjust local nuance.
And, and to your point also about providing transitional
bespoke provisions into that.
So if we can get that sort of, that matrix right?
Is that what you're sort of looking for?
Yeah, for sure. Yeah. I mean there's so many.
You go to one town, to another town, it's every,
the national policy statements are interpreted differently.
Everything's, everything's a real
struggle and nothing's certain.
There's no certainty anywhere you go
because there's not a national guideline.
Councils interpret it differently.
And also infrastructure consistency and certain
Specifications. And just
so I know we're running outta time,
but just to make the observation
that we do support the regional spatial plan
because one of the problems with the RMA to date is
that it's, we were always battling over priorities should
growth, trump heritage should ecologically you
know, all the different factors.
And we, every time we have an argument we're trying,
we're battling where the balance should be struck.
What the regional spatial plan will eliminate some of
that debate that will prioritize growth in certain places.
Um, and it will say, this is where our ecological area
and that is a good thing that will give us certainty.
But, but it can't be set in stone
because of the way the market changes. And
Just final comment, the intent of this bill is
that councils can no longer use infrastructure
as a reason to say no.
That's the intent of this bill, which I think is one
of your issues you've come across.
And you can't sell s without water and waste water.
There's always, there has to be a solution to that.
But we were saying it can be private or
The private sector can solve a lot of those issues.
But at the moment, council no, no, we're not putting in
for the truck then until 2035.
We're going, well we'll put it in now on the basis
that we pay for it and we'll get it back ourselves school.
And so, so that's where the flexibility needs to come into.
But at the moment, council no,
no infrastructure can't do it.
No, we don't want you to do your private wastewater
plant 'cause we don't get the revenue.
So it just stops and it tracks stop
Development. And we are
gonna have to stop our tracks now.
But, um, look, it's uh, really, really good submissions.
Uh, we used the time very, very well.
And look, it was really interesting
to see the practical challenges you're facing with kids,
obviously why there's reform.
So thank you
Submission.
Right. So, uh, we now welcome uh, our next submitter, uh,
lawyers for Climate Change
Climate Action.
Climate Action. Okay, go. Climate action.
We go, uh, lawyers for Climate Action.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us, so uh, take your submission
as read and we'll hand it over to you
to talk us through the main points.
Yes, thank you very much.
Uh, so my name is Jessica Palate.
I'm executive director at Lawyers for Climate Action
and I'm joined by Sally jc, who is one of our board members
and Lawyers for Climate Action.
We're a registered charity and one of our purposes is to try
and align New Zealand's laws with
our climate change obligations
and targets in a net zero future.
And the key point we want
to make in this submission was two.
One is that there's no possibility New Zealand is going
to enjoy IE thriving net zero low emissions future if we do
not plan for it.
And what this, what these bills proceed on the assumption
of is that managing the effects of climate change, um,
can be relegated entirely to our climate framework laws.
That assumption, um, is manifested through the bills
by a lack of any reference to emissions reduction plans,
lack of any reference to climate change mitigation.
And our core point is that
that approach is fundamentally misguided
and actually may cut across some of the Minister
for climate change's legal obligations
and duties in a way which is concerning.
We think that we need to be protecting
and enhancing carbon sinks like wetlands,
ensuring development is consistent
with a low emissions future.
And with our climate decis, uh, our climate obligations,
we need to be avoiding ad hoc decision making
by local councils at local level.
Rather, our planning law should be a framework
that actually aligns our planning
and environmental decisions, um, with the climate
and outcomes and obligations we've already agreed to.
So the fundamental point here is there needs
to be further work teasing out how the plan and bill
and nip actually work alongside the Climate
Change Response Act.
The second key point that we want to make,
and this is the point that Sally's going to take, is
that some simple clarifications
and amendments to the bills will ensure
that they better integrate with our wider frameworks
for climate mitigation without risking this ad
hoc decision making.
And we've set out in our submission some suggestions for
how you might wish to do so.
The problem is that the legislation is currently drafted,
lacks significant clarity on whether the bills cover climate
mitigation at all.
And in its current form, litigation is very likely to ensue.
It can be avoided.
Some submitters have asked you to make clear
that climate mitigation is out of scope,
but we would urge you not to take that path.
If you take that path, we think it will be next
to impossible for New Zealand
to meet its climate obligations.
That includes our budgets, our 2050 target.
And instead, if you specify clearly
and expressly how climate mitigation is relevant,
that these bills can actually help us achieve those targets
and transition to a safer climate in the future.
So taking you through this first point,
and we have a handout, um, which I might get Sally to
or someone to pass around this key point is that the lack
of cohesiveness and thought given to
how these bills work along the Climate Change Response Act,
our main climate framework law
risks cutting across New Zealand's climate change
obligations and duties.
And the handout that I'm passing
around sets out what those are.
Um, and so I'll take you, take you
through those when they've been handed out.
So on the first page is diagram actually made
by the Climate Change Commission
that explains New Zealand's climate obligations.
So at the top you can see, uh, the Paris Agreement.
So this is New Zealand is signed up
with most other countries in the
world to the Paris Agreement.
We've committed to reducing emissions.
Our limiting temperature rise to 1.5 degrees
above pre-industrial temperatures.
And the main way in which we have committed to doing
that are through our
NDCs called nationally Determined contributions.
This government has set our NDCs
and I've put what those are for 2030 and 2035.
Those are targets
and commitments that we have obligations to, um, to meet
and take steps towards meeting.
And the way in which we have enabled those to be met, um,
and given effect to them domestically is
through the Climate Change Response Act.
That's our main Climate Change Framework law
and the Climate Change Response Act at its apex,
it's our 2050 net zero target.
That's a legal requirement that we achieve
that under the act.
The way in which we meet
that is the ACT sets out these series of emissions budgets,
which act as stepping stones towards meeting
that 2050 target.
And the Minister for Climate Change is a legal duty
to ensure that each emissions budget is met,
which is really important.
Those budgets are given effect
by emission introduction plans.
So these are economy wide cross sector plans
that touch really almost every sector
of the New Zealand economy, looking at
how we can reduce emissions in line with those obligations.
So why is this all relevant here?
Emission Introduction Plans integrate with
and rely on resource management law
to work alongside other measures like the ETS by planning
for activities and their spatial distribution in a manner
that will enable us to meet our budgets
and to demonstrate this, the next pages of this handout
actually pull out extracts from this
government's emissions reduction plan.
So this is our emissions reduction plan that takes us
through to 2030.
And it pulls out a couple of examples of extracts
where our emissions reduction plan relies on
and integrates with decisions made under current
resource management laws.
And you can see it touches sectors from renewable energy
to transport, to wetlands, to forestry, all things
that the planning bill
and the net are going to impact and influence.
The key reason why we've given this to you is to show
that failing to even
reference this plan anywhere in those bills opens you up
to the risk where you have decisions made at a local level
that don't take into account anything
that's in the emissions reduction plan
that don't take into account the budgets
and make the Minister for climate change's job incredibly
difficult as he has to ensure that the budgets are met.
But be like saying to a minister of finance, you have
to make, you have to meet certain fiscal targets,
but exempting key spending authorities from considering
those targets in any of their spending decisions.
It's a simple point, but it's an interesting emission given
the current RMA actually requires emissions reduction plans
to be taken into account for certain decisions.
And also at various points in both these replacement bills.
Um, it was a requirement to take into account, um,
national adaptation plans.
And the simple submission Sally will take you through it is
that where you refer to national adaptation plans,
it would be very easy and sensible to also refer
to emission reduction plans.
In terms of, you know, what this means on the ground, take
for example, nature-based solutions
to address climate change.
This is one of the five key pillars
of New Zealand's emissions reduction strategy.
Enhancing nature-based solutions is things like wetlands.
It's the net based approach that the government is taking
to emissions reductions in the current form of the bills.
There's no reference.
And actually there's, unlike the current RMA,
there's a provision relating to wetlands and, and protecting
and, um, preserving wetlands that's not in these bills.
The problem is that when you don't have that there,
you can have local authorities making decisions
that actually don't enhance wetlands
and start contrast to
what emissions reduction plan governments climate
strategy requires it to do.
So that's the very simple point there.
The second thing I'll say under this is
that the bills also seem to proceed on the assumption
that the ETS is an effective enough tool
to reducing emissions.
So again, we can sideline
emissions reductions from these bills.
The simple point here is that the expert working group
actually advised against this exact approach in paragraph
1 22 of their submission.
They said that land use planning system could compliment
emissions pricing, um,
but it shouldn't be a substitute for it.
In terms of why this matters,
I wanna highlight three particular risks.
And those are really areas where we think that
you could end up with worse decision making by the fact
that you have these bills not taking into mitigate,
into account mitigation at all.
And that's worse decision making, both in terms
of climate risks and benefits.
One, protection of climate
of carbon sinks is an essential part of climate mitigation.
Um, look at how the ERP relies on nature-based solutions.
For example, when we're doing spatial planning
and consenting decisions, it makes sense
to consider things like wetlands, coastal vegetation,
healthy seed bed.
It's helpful to consider those contributions
that they make in removing carbon from the atmosphere
that should be recognized in these bills.
It's an oversight. Two development can be undertaken in ways
that increase or decrease emissions.
Green storm water solutions reduced impermeable surfaces,
half parks, active transport corridors.
Our environmental planning and our view should prefer
or show any kind of preference towards those
and shouldn't be completely agnostic.
Um, particularly given there's an opportunity here to,
to better, uh, take those into account.
But third, the environmental legislation we have here is
focused solely on adapting the effects of climate change
and reducing the risks from natural hazards.
That's, you know, the limited extent
to which they reference climate change.
It just doesn't make much sense if that's one
of the focuses of these bills.
But the development that the legislation enables will
actually worsen those same risks.
We think that's an oversight. I'll pass on to Sally.
Thank you. So, um,
as Jessica has said, there is a significant lack
of clarity in the bills around climate mitigation
as in emissions reduction.
So there are goals
and li provisions for limits
that could arguably encompass greenhouse gas emissions
reduction, but it,
it's just left unsaid whether it does or not.
Um, and clause 14 of the, of the planning bill,
which requires decision makers
to disregard specified effects, it's not clear whether the,
the excluded effects include whether climate change is
covered by that or not.
Um, so the, the Lawyers
for Climate Action Submission has set out a number
of options for improvements.
And I'll just highlight four quickly.
The first is to include climate change mitigation
as a standalone goal.
And so the suggested wording
and the submission is to contribute
to New Zealand's greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets
by enabling low emissions development,
protecting carbon sinks
and ensuring planning decisions are consistent with budgets,
targets, and plans under the Climate Change Response Act.
So it's just in alignment. It's nothing new.
It's in alignment with what has already been agreed
to under the Climate Change Response Act,
including by this government.
Um, the, we have recommended in the submission
that climate is added as a domain for which limits are set
and in practice we anticipate those limits would derive from
the emissions reduction, the emissions budgets,
and ERP emissions reduction plan requirements.
So keeping with the funnel effect intent of the bill, um,
requiring consideration as Jessica has said,
of emissions reduction plans
whenever the bills require consideration
of national adaptation plans, for example, in section 97
of the natural environment bill.
Um, and we were pleased to see that, um, a number
of the gen tailors have also supported that, um, approach.
We would go further and say
that the decisions should be consistent with the, uh,
emissions reduction plans rather than simply, um,
take 'em into account or have regard to them.
Um, and then lastly, that when considering the granting
of permits and consents under both bills,
there should be a requirement to consider the effects
of climate change and effects on climate change
and consistency with those plans.
So that would, again, keep
but keeping with that funnel approach, requiring
that consideration in light of the work
that's already been done above.
I'm gonna just finish very briefly with a, um,
a separate note on climate adaptation.
So moving on from reducing emissions
to adapting to climate change.
Um, the only goal related to climate adaptation
and the effects of climate changes
to safeguard communities from the effects
of natural hazards,
but the definition of natural hazards is
a bit odd in the way that it references climate change.
It is only considers only encompasses the effects
of climate change to the extent they affect other natural
hazards, whereas climate change has a number
of direct effects not through other natural hazards such
as sea level rise, ocean warming, ocean acidification.
Those are all impacting on aquaculture, um,
coastal subdivision and a number of other, um, social
and economic, um, activities.
So, um, that's us. And happy to answer any
Questions. Look, thank you very
much. We have got a few questions, uh,
so we'll go to pre first.
Um, thank you.
Your submission just got a quick clarification question.
Um, the point that you make on environmental limits mm-hmm.
Um, you've alluded to the fact that there is
possibly a concern with the sequencing of that.
Um, we know that through this legislation, uh,
spatial planning could be done first
before environmental limits are set,
and that's quite a shift.
Would you, you haven't gone so far as recommending
that the sequencing be changed such that limits, um,
are determined first before planning.
Would, would you, would you recommend that? Yes. Yeah. Yeah.
Okay, cool. Thank you. And now we'll go to Grant.
Yeah. Sort of a two part question, really. Thank you.
Um, so think if you wanna include climate change
reduction in the, um, uh, in the, in the bill, it's a goal
and so forth, uh, the emissions reduction I should say,
then would that, could that potentially situation where by,
and we just had some property developers
and they're building a development and,
and could that then say, well,
actually we don't want car parks
'cause we want people to use a bus.
Is that the sort of thing that could limit to
It doesn't have to, So it could lead,
But it has, hasn't it?
Well, it hasn't in every, there's lots of developments
that still have car parks
and there's lots of developments
that aren't very well integrated
with, with public transportation.
What, what I'm trying to point out is the,
the potential outcomes if we,
if we don't get the framing right.
Mm-hmm. And, and, and,
'cause I mean, I I, I've, I've seen developments
where they've said, no, no car parks,
and yet people have got cars.
Right? And, and, and,
or they got an electric car and they can't charge it.
That sort of stuff does happen.
Well, we do actually have, uh, um, we have a regulation
that says you can't have car parks at the moment.
So that's what's driven that rather than, um,
ephemeral unclear climate obligations.
It's been regulations, uh,
through the national policy statement for urban development
that say don't have car parks.
So I think that's now been repealed.
No, but that has been or hasn't. I,
I don't think there is a thing
that says you can't have car parks.
It says you can't require developments
to have a specific number of
Specific numbers. Thank fair. But they actually
Do have the ability to provide it.
That's a fair clarification. Thank you.
And then just, but it's not come from a,
from an ephemeral unclear climate target, it's come from,
Because I suppose that this is the, I see the danger
of if you include emissions reduction into some
of this stuff, how it's interpreted and used could,
and I'll give another example from background.
I come from in the farming sector.
So if I want to put another, um, uh, buy the neighbor out
and milk another hundred cows, for example, would you see
that as then having to be, go through
that emissions reduction process as part of that ability
to run those extra cows?
Well, from my perspective, the question, and,
and one of the core problems
with the ne been the planning bill,
is it doesn't even see climate mitigation
as a relevant question to consider.
So we are not saying that climate mitigation has
to be the primary factor that's considered, um,
for decisions made by developers
or made by farming community,
but it should be a relevant factor that's considered,
in part because failure to consider it cuts across different
obligations and duties by the minister.
And If I could just add to that,
just on the farming point,
the emission reduction plan doesn't currently
see having less cows as a way to
re reduce emissions currently, but That's right.
But, but I mean, we have to accept the way that, that we,
the way we've set up our Climate Change Response Act is
to have emissions reduction plans that drive
carbon reduction.
If we don't trust in that process, we can't trust in any
of these processes that have subordinate legislation
that then influences lower down decision making.
We are just saying, let's integrate with the plans
that we've already government and people have signed up to
Look. Thank you. We've
just got time for one last question.
Uh, you've got us up first. No, no, you go. No.
Um, you'll take the last question.
Um, well, I mean, I think you're asking
for some quite basic integration suggestions.
Yeah. Thank you for that.
A lot of people in their submissions have called
for greater integration actually with the two bills
and the suggestion that they could actually be much more
integrated if they were one.
Bill. Do you have any thoughts about that in terms
of helping with the general integration
of climate legislation?
I don't have any particular views on the integration
of whether there should be one bill versus two.
I mean, we've chosen to make this submission
really focused on climate
and actually provide what I would call low
hanging fruits options.
Ones that even gen detailers have
agreed should be considered.
Um, so I think they would be really important
meaningful changes.
Um, so we haven't gone so far as to suggest, you know,
one bill rather than two.
But I do know that a number
of submitters have con raised concerns about integration.
And I know there's a range of quite practical issues
that people have pointed out.
Um, we haven't focused on those to keep ours concise,
but, um, doesn't mean we don't agree.
The, the one area where it could assist is with the, um,
sequencing of spatial planning and limit setting. I think.
Look, thank you very much, uh, for your submission, uh,
and for the takes around climate change and climate action.
So, uh, we appreciate your considerations there
and we'll take on that feedback.
So thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.
So we now welcome our next submitter, uh, grant.
Grant welcome. Thank you to the select committee.
Uh, we're heading almost into the afternoon,
but we're still morning, so early lunchtime,
so I hope the blood sugars are you welcome.
Uh, look, you have 10 minutes with us, um,
so take your submissions, uh,
but we'll hand it over to you to talk us
through the main points
and then we'll open up for a few questions. So,
Thank you madam Chair. And
bearing in mind, um, I've only got 10 minutes.
Um, there's really just one point
that I wanna make outta my submission.
It's the point around, um, that I made
around significant sort of existing planning instruments
and regimes that are in place that have been developed over
a decade or more with a lot of time
and money spent by a lot of people.
And it just as I've sort of been around the country talking
to people, there's an acknowledgement
that there's some provisions that we don't want
to be lost in the upheaval of reform
or be thrown up for grabs.
Again, somehow that might then prompt significant re
relitigation and you're then in the trenches again with,
with these provisions.
And you may say to me, well, don't worry about it
because won't the,
won't the councils when they're preparing their plans, just
bring those through anyway.
Um, probably, but not definitely.
Uh, but the point is there that they would be up for grabs
again through that, um, process.
And the point I'm getting at, um, well, that submission is
that there should be, in my view,
some provisions around the country.
I think the proper legal term is grandparent it in,
but they come into plans, they need
to be mandated to come into plans.
And those bits, they're not up for grabs.
They continue to run through and be operative
and not be challengable while everything else is sorted out.
Um, hopefully the rest of my submission was clear,
and I'll leave the rest of the time for you all
to ask questions.
Thank you very much. Uh,
we'll take our first question from Lam.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I wanted to pick up on the permitted activity
aspects and the registration.
Sure. Part of your submission.
And, you know, a lot of what I understand
to be the rationale with that is
because if we are moving to this much more permissive regime
where a lot more activities are permitted, um, someone needs
to be at least chipping it when it comes to monitoring
and the cost with reporting
and actually enabling essentially that permit activity
to be able to exist in perpetuity.
Do you agree that there are some, you know,
quite significant activities potentially
that would actually require registration?
Are you more just directing it to very, like, inane stuff?
Examples we've had is like spraying, you know,
like registering every,
That's exactly what I'm, can you, that's exactly
what I'm getting at the way, and I'm assuming
and hoping it's a mistake in the draft
because there are, so, 'cause it'll fail
because a, people won't know
that they're doing a permitted activity
and need to be registered.
And if every permitted activity, you know, do,
do we really need to know
where someone's doing 80 cubic meters of earthwork,
you know, when the limit might be a hundred.
It's, and I, I think I said in my submission,
there are certain permitted activities that you do want
to know the rate at which they're being done
and where they are and so on and so forth.
So water takes potentially,
or from geothermal systems mm-hmm.
That sort of, because you need the whole picture. Mm-hmm.
But the, as you put it, the inane stuff, you know,
because there'll be so many permitted activities
and the councils won't cope.
Mm-hmm. Especially with a process where they have
to receive it, take two weeks
to decide if it's permitted, write a letter back.
Mm-hmm. There's just no, that won't work.
And there'll be no benefit in it. Thank
You.
Thank you. Uh, look, in your submission,
you do talk about the funnel approach
and it, uh, you know, looking
to create more certainty and consistency.
We've raised a couple of questions around that.
Can you just elaborate a little bit further on your
concerns there?
So the first concern I outlined was
around the national instrument development,
and I'm sure you've viewed this from others,
and they, their consequences are far reaching
and we have to get them right
because everything underneath it has
to implement those national directions.
And giving 20 working days
to submit on national instruments
and perhaps not getting a look at them to start
with via any sort of collaborative development process is,
in my view, when I could get 20 working days to submit
to my neighbor's proposal, that only affects me.
Um, not appropriate. There needs to be collaboration.
And I heard a submit ear earlier, um, an answer
to a question when you asked, do you think there needs
to be a collaborative process for the development
of the national instruments?
My view is yes. And if I can
put it in context, if the top of the funnel's that wide,
then the timeframes for developing those extra instruments
and giving people the chance and put development
should be commensurate with it.
Mm-hmm. Not the same as what's at the bottom. Mm-hmm.
And, and there will be benefits from
involving technical specialists from
ARA and, and stakeholders from a range of perspectives,
because the national instruments are gonna have to work.
We've had examples in the past
where national environmental standards have landed
with possibly limited consultation and so on.
And the permitted activity standards don't work.
So you can never be permitted, you are never going to,
so you always end up needing consents.
But maybe if we'd just heard a few more voices
and had a bit more input, it might've worked a bit
better. Mm-hmm. But,
So, so just on that, 'cause you do give quite a few
examples of projects that you've been involved in the north
of Hamilton, Southern Links, additional white matter
expressway, white rail, many, many, uh, projects.
How do you feel that funnel, uh, system now would be, would,
would be better for those projects, um,
to the current system?
And perhaps you could give an example.
Well, so all of those projects were, um, sort
of designation and resource consent type projects.
So you're down at the implementation end of the Yeah.
Of the funnel where,
and some of those projects go back a decade
and some of them are more recent.
Mm-hmm. And if I go back a decade,
what was missing,
and if I actually go right back to when I started my career,
which wasn't long after the RMA turned up,
what was missing was the national direction.
Mm-hmm. So some
of those projects would've benefited from
national direction at the top of the funnel like we have now
with the NPS for infrastructure.
So you wouldn't be, you wouldn't be
scrapping over the same old things on an infrastructure
project about, you know, is, is there any benefit to this
or whatever, how do we recognize the benefits?
You've got national direction that says they are beneficial
and here's how you recognize that
and here's how you deal
with your effects and so on and so forth.
So that's,
so if being national director direction earlier for some
of those projects, it would've assisted.
Mm-hmm. Um, the example I gave, um,
I was alluding to, I know there's one little aspect
of the NES for freshwater to do
with culvert permitted activity standard,
and it was very, very difficult to comply with.
So we ended up on some projects applying for consents
for 130 culverts
because you just didn't know whether you could
comply as a permitted activity.
So the safest thing to do was apply, but there's costs
and there's times associated with that.
Whereas if that standard had maybe been worked out a little
bit more with a bit more of a collaborative approach
with specialists that do this stuff every day, they know
what will work in practice, you know,
that cost could have been saved.
Yeah. No, that's a, that's a really good example.
Um, look, uh, we've met time.
Thank you very much for your time this morning.
Um, and appreciate you sharing, um, some
of your personal firsthand experiences and the whole system
and how it currently works
and how it can potentially work better.
So thank you. Thank you very much, very much.
Good luck with your considerations.
Appreciate it. Thanks.
So we now move on to our next submitter
who is also here in person.
Brent Claude. Yes.
Welcome to the Select committee. Uh, it's gonna
Do a bit of speech, but we haven't got much time, so
No, that's, that's great. We've
got a couple of handouts here,
so thank you very much, Brent.
Look, you've got 10 minutes with us, so, uh,
take your submission as read,
but we'll hand it over to you to talk us through it
and then we'll open up the questions.
Okay. So they are amazed.
A, um, as an effects based piece of legislation
and we're in the business of, um, getting rid
of cost lease properties is 13%
of the housing stock in New Zealand.
When we do that conversion, there is no effect,
there's no change on the property.
It's basically a, a paper, um, changeover
between the two different types of Kenya.
So there is no effect on the environment.
So the conversions,
you can't subdivide a piece
of land under the current RMA without subdivision consent.
And so that opens it up to council.
So interpretation all the rest of it.
So it's, so it has no effect on the environment.
Shouldn't be inside the RMA, but it is by default.
So the whole basis of a, of these conversion is that they,
they have to be lawfully established existing uses
and under the current arm that's protected under section 10.
And, um, you, we, I'm asking that they,
this is a once in a lifetime opportunity to, um,
make an exemption for these problems.
And, um, yeah, probably best, um,
if you wanna ask me some questions.
Um, Cameron L
Yep. Um, Brent,
uh, total or there are plenty of cross leases
and, uh, I'm trying to figure out what, what's the problem
that you've got with these cross
Each? So each,
we had to deal with, so have marked, um,
district council and was a couple of councils there.
Um, and that, that council,
because we, we were required to do a subject consent,
then it open into interpretation.
So all the cross cross lease.
So, so to, to become not a cross lease of
Yeah. You have to have to, you
have to apply
for a subdivision consent.
Yep. And that's where the problems start.
So every council that we deal
with all throughout New Zealand, apart from Christchurch,
'cause they've learn the hard way
because of the earthquakes.
So we can get a consent through in no time down there. And
The problems are what, like what,
what are the problems once you start dealing
With dealing with council?
It's expensive. It's slow.
It's basically re you know, um, recon,
consenting something that was done.
They lawfully established, you know, decades ago.
These, these cross leases will never live, you know,
much longer than the, um, than the houses themselves.
You know, so they have a, that it was set up to last
for 999 years.
They clearly don't last that long
as the housing stops getting older, you know, there's a hell
of a lot of them, 250,000 odd houses.
Um, there's gonna be some serious of problems. And so when,
When, um, two neighbors who have cross lease Yep.
Um, decide that they'd like to, um, subdivide Yes.
You know, um, I've heard numbers, $50,000 on average, um,
cost to just start the process.
Process. Um, if both, if both, um,
if both owners, uh, cross lease owners, uh, decide that
that should happen, uh, what,
what is the council actually checking
off in that subdivision? Well,
They, as far as
we're concerned, they're just getting on the road.
Yeah. Okay. They, they are,
they're not actually required to do anything.
And all we do is we run through this process and yeah.
Waste a whole lot of money and time
and at the end of the day, we still get the
consent 'cause they have to give it to us. And
Final question on this.
Yes, Karen, the, um, when it comes
to development contributions, are they charging development
Contributions? No. 'cause that's, they've
already, it's an existing use,
so it's already been awfully established.
Whatever the contributions were
historically, that's, that's it. Done. Yep.
And does anyone else got a
Question? No, I, um,
yeah, I might jump in
because I, I'm happy to keep the, it's quite unique,
this particular issue that you've brought to us.
Absolutely haven't, we haven't discussed this in,
in in depth that'll get,
but it, um, you are saying here
that it affects over 270,000 existing homes
for about 700,000 New Zealanders.
So, uh, which is 13% of New Zealand's housing stock,
It's about 20% in Auckland.
Okay. So a hundred thousand. Yeah.
So, so could you just give us like a practical example,
like exactly where you feel if, um, this was, you know,
included and we took the opportunity
how it would, it would work?
I, I think, I mean, you need to talk to your legal people,
but the, it would be the, I think it's section 1 0 5
of the current RMA that describes, um,
that can't sets the rules down for subdivision of land.
You have to have a subdivision consent
or it's, you know, type of resource consent.
Yeah. It would simply be in there somewhere where you would
put an exemption in
for an ex a lawfully established existing use.
Mm-hmm. That is, that is, you know,
because there is no effect on the environment.
It doesn't, it shouldn't be in the RMA. Okay.
And we are forced to, to work within
that framework and it doesn't work. That doesn't fit.
Okay. No, thank you for that.
Um, LAN, so what I'm not quite understanding,
I appreciate if you could unpack it.
So what is the difference
between the cross lease dwelling issue Yes.
And the two unit title?
Very similar. Okay. Very similar. Yeah.
So they, so basically the same sort of system,
but more but more modern.
But it was designed to get skirt
around the subdivision rules. Okay.
But it's still two separate owners. Two
Separate owners, yeah. So it's very
similar to across these structure. Okay.
And they set them up and you have
to have a body corporate, body corporate meetings.
Nobody holds 'em, it's just an absolute fast. Right.
So that, that, that is similar to across these structure.
It's a lawfully established existing, it just happens
to be in a unit title arrangement other than cross
these same sort of problems. Okay.
So no additional rules or differences?
They're just different categories. Yeah.
It, it pretty well basic what, what I tried
to do is not bring in, um,
multi-unit unit developments
like high rises and things mm-hmm.
Because it's not relevant, relevant. It's only when it's a
couple of houses that are on a, on a single piece of land.
So it's a joint, you know, shared ownership of land, assume.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Thank you.
Look, Cameron's got another question.
Um, so, so, um, if we take this outta the RMA, uh,
well, the planning laws.
Yes. What, what rule, what law would govern it and,
or, or be operative
Sorry, sorry, what was that again? If
We were to take this out of the planning
laws of New Zealand Yes.
What law would sort of deal,
like under what structure would this be
Population?
Well, the easy the easy answer is that you'd do that if,
if if I didn't bring it up as point, they would,
they would say I would just get a,
um, certificate of compliance.
Yeah. That's even worse. Right. So we don't want that.
This was, this was going to my question I was trying
to get to my question is, is what, like, what matters?
So how often in your experience do two cross lease, um,
holders have a falling out neighbors at war situation
and it makes, um, somebody who wants
to go into a subdivision?
Well, I
Get the neighbors, it's a bigger issue than that.
Right. So, okay. But would that, especially in Auckland,
so in Auckland for example, um, that it's a huge, these are,
these are fully developed properties in urban areas.
The infrastructure's there, everything's there
and you can't do anything to it.
You can't, you know, redevelop under Auckland unitary plan.
So it's 20% of the housing stock in Auckland.
That, that is, it's, you know, you,
you simply can't do anything with those properties
unless we get them out of that cross lease structure.
But you could do something if both neighbors agreed to the
Subdivision. So that that's
a starting point. Yeah.
So we have to have them both on board.
How many people are not agreed to the subdivision? Um,
Oh look, it's not really not agreeing.
Everyone wants to do it. It's just
they can't afford to do it.
It's a, it's a cost issue.
And by having the subdivision, you know, the,
the council processes in the way,
and that cost of that just makes the whole thing much more
expensive, you know, adds both six to $10,000
for each conversion.
And all we're doing is all we're doing
is get, getting something there.
So in your solution, it would just require both parties
to Well, all parties are not agree.
Well, no, I, I, no, what we're asking for is exemption,
so we don't have to get a subdivision consent at
All. I think what I'm trying to get to
in jail, if, if I may,
is the, uh, somebody who owns a, a house A mm-hmm.
Um, doesn't want house B to become a changed that,
And that's their choice. Right.
But there are, there are some people around
Like that. They'd be able to put
a kibosh on that
through their cross lease range.
They they can do that just by their fundamental rights.
Yeah. They can't, we can't force them to two,
two parties have to agree and work together. Subdivided,
No, sorry, I'm trying to say, if the subdivision was
to happen, um, right now under cross lease arrangement,
house B would need the agreement of house A Correct.
To be able to do, uh, a development on
that piece of land if the Well
Well, no, it's higher issue than that.
They, they jointly own the fe simple land. Yes. Yes.
Half, like, half share each. Right.
If it's just two of them. So you can't, one
of them can't unilaterally just go
and subdivide the property.
They have to work together. Okay. Okay.
I mean, we'd like this, this,
this is just the subdivision consent part of it.
The next thing that I would be pushing for is,
is a separate piece of legislation that deals
with getting rid of cross lease properties,
but that's outside of the RMA. Okay.
Understood. Thank you. Look,
thank you very much, Brent.
And you know, thanks for bringing that to us.
Specific issue. It was really interesting.
It's, it's a big issue. Very good.
There's lot, there's submission out there. Yeah. Thank you.
No, thank you very much.
Look, we now welcome our next submitter,
the New Zealand Institute of Landscape Architects.
Welcome all to the select committee. Got it.
Uh, Gilda.
And look, you've got 20 minutes with us, so, uh, you know,
we've got your submission.
It's a good weighty, uh, submission.
Uh, lots of good considerations in there.
So, uh, we'll open it up for you to talk us
through the submission and then, um,
we'll have a discussion and some questions.
So thank you very much.
I'm the, I, um, representing the museum,
nstitute Landscape Architect
and specifically ku, the landscape Architect,
Uh, Koto Project, Gilbert Landscape Architect.
30 years or over 30 years experience in New New Zealand
assessment and design work.
I also sit on the other side of the table
as commissioner on council hearings
and fast track applications.
And I guess was lucky enough
to grow up on a farm in New Zealand
and have a particular interest in the rural landscape.
Thank you.
Uh, marina, uh, Shannon Ray, uh, landscape architect, uh,
based in Hastings.
Um, five doors down from Catherine's Yes. Electorate office.
Uh, I'll come back to my experience.
Uh, you've got me for 40 minutes, so, uh, in this chair.
So I'll come back to that in my next next submission.
Uh, Kira Simon button, top goer.
Uh, I am the Vice President of Tia Peter Aura,
New Zealand Institute of Landscape Architects
and a associate landscape architect, um,
at isus in Auckland.
So, just to open, for those who may be less familiar
with us, the NLA is the internationally recognized
professional body representing more than 700 landscape
architects across out there, Aurora.
Our members work across the full spectrum of environments,
urban, rural, coastal, and natural.
And we work in the public and private sectors in education
and in community and charitable organizations.
Across roa, landscape architects work in design,
restoration management, consenting policy,
and spatial planning with landscape architects,
often working at the intersections of built environments,
natural systems, community wellbeing
and cultural relationships.
Our members work on helping
to make positive change in the landscape.
New roads, power stations, wind farms, transmission lines,
new towns and neighborhoods,
transport networks and coastal protection.
We help to make things happen for the good of roa.
And the work we do has given us a practical
and on the ground understanding of
what makes a well-functioning environment
and how cumulative a change can occur over time.
Now, during this presentation,
we're unsurprisingly gonna be
talking quite a lot about landscape.
Mm-hmm. Uh,
but whilst we do so, we'd like to ground
that discussion in something personal.
We'd like you to think for a moment about where you live,
your street, your neighborhood, the places you pass
through every day, and the places nearby
that you particularly enjoy spending time in.
Think about a local park, the view you see on the way
to work, the coastline, the hills,
or even simply the character of the street where you live.
Ask yourself why you live there.
What is it about those places that you value?
What makes 'em feel distinctive, familiar, or meaningful?
And how connected do you feel to them?
Most importantly, we'd like you to consider
how you might feel if the qualities
that make those places special, the things
that give them their character
and identity were gradually changed or lost.
Because ultimately, this is a fundamental component
of landscape planning and landscape assessment.
Understanding what people value about places,
recognizing those values in a structured
and professional way, and helping guide change so
that development can occur while still maintaining the
qualities that may our environments worth living it.
Thank you. And over to Shannon, who will take you
through the rest of our oral submission.
Uh, cool. Thanks. Uh, Simon. Uh, yeah, we, we agree.
Um, a reform is required and,
and we're gonna also start by saying that we totally accept
that landscape architects have probably been the Bain
of people's lives for a long period of time.
Uh, we disagree. We, we draw things out.
We've had inconsistencies, we've created sub um,
we've celebrated subjectivity.
We've celebrated difference.
And, but we realized we needed to change.
Um, from about 2017, following a reasonable push from, uh,
judge New Hook, we worked
With Court planners, MFE
and the wider profession
to create this wonderful document here to t Manu.
It's set out to provide consistency
to find agreement in our methodologies.
Um, it provides common definitions, um, a base
of landscape integrating physical systems.
Cultural, everyday experience.
Landscape is not an aesthetic layer.
It's an underlying pattern that shapes identity, access,
safety, legibility, environmental performance,
and which we're gonna show economic value.
Landscape integrates physical, so the tangible,
tangible, actual elements of the environment
with associative values.
That's how we connect and remember places
and perceptual values, how we see
and interpret the world around us and our Maori views.
It's about a deep relationship people have with place.
And it's why landscape underpins everything
that follows in in our presentation.
We think it's the binding mechanism
between the natural environment and successful planning.
It's the glue between the two bills.
And we think what we've given you here,
and if you need more copies, we can get them, is a how
to guide on how to write a spatial plan.
Our work here focuses on measurable,
mapable predictable values.
The valuation is still required,
but actually all evaluation has a degree of subjectivity.
A wetland definition, um, eroding system involves opinion.
Um, what we've tried to do with this document,
and we're really proud of it, is create a methodology
and a common ground for which we can make decisions.
It's proved to be really successful.
Um, in the last five years, six years, we've set
to resolve many of this objective landscape issues
that have hounded the RMA for so long.
This document's used in fast track processing
because it speeds up things, reduces, um, disputes.
If anything, the fast track process has shown us that the,
um, for example, contact Energy South
and Wind Farm, that was released on time, you know,
despite significant landscape concerns about that,
um, came out this week.
So we consider the bills need to embrace landscape.
It's the connection between planning the environment
and people landscape underpins what makes, uh, ro
so valuable to the people who are here.
But let's start with economy
'cause that's what we really want to know.
Um, this of course is a Fonterra milk truck.
It was shipped to China, uh, parked in a conference attended
by some 400,000 delegates.
Look what's on the side of the truck. It is not a product.
It's New Zealand rural landscape.
An image that underpins the Fonterra brand
landscape is not just scenery.
It is the packaging of our national export story
across food, fiber, tourism screen.
More than a hundred billion dollars of annual revenue
depends directly on quality, coherence, recognizable,
unique identity of New Zealand environment.
And these are everyday landscapes on packaging, marketing,
destination branding.
It's not just our spectacular Alps in our forests,
but farms, orchard, cities, neighborhoods,
landscape underpins how we present ourselves to the world,
how we boast about the fact
that our food tastes better than anyone else.
How our natural fibers keep our, keep the world warm.
And how New Zealand is the most lable plate from Earth.
Every other developed country in the world
embraces landscape in its legislation, allowing it.
We can't ignore it. We can't take
landscape outta the system.
It underpins our whole economy and our way of life.
Fonterra understands this Peter Jackson
icebreaker in New Zealand.
They're enriched by their connection
to New Zealand landscape.
Um, we shouldn't exclude landscape considerations from
planning legislation because landscapes
underpin our economy.
Let's talk about Christchurch.
It can take decades for cities
to recover from natural disasters,
especially at the scale of the earthquakes.
I've been to numerous places around the world,
which are still recovering 1500 even 4,000 years
after scale devastation we saw in Christchurch.
Yet today, Christchurch is cool.
It's vibrant, exciting, livable.
It's a fantastic place to visit. Why?
Because of the success
of the spatial planning or blueprint process.
It was multidisciplinary, tense, fast,
but what it made, made it all stick together was a single
foundation landscape.
Through the blueprint,
Christchurch rediscovered its natural environment
and it leveraged its natural features.
The city rebuilt itself around the river, the park,
and the pub public realm, not around the hard assets.
The 1950s thinking of build the roads first was replaced
with a more intrinsic look at functionality, identity,
and people landscape.
The early moves focused on river spaces created confident
for residents, investors,
and businesses to return to the city.
The environment worked for them.
Coherent public space gave social li license
for higher density, living, walking, cycling.
But the qualities Christchurch leaned on identity,
coherence, legibility Sense Place, are the very ones
that clause 14 of the planning bill excludes.
It removes the fundamental tools needed
to deliver successful spatial plans on the ground.
Here's another example. This is Hobsonville.
It's become one of the most desirable
places to live in Auckland.
The concepts that underpin it are being replicated across
other parts of the city like North Coat and Drury.
It works because landscape's integrated.
It's not just a focusing on on identity and coherence,
but through integration
of in necessary infrastructure within the public realm.
Stormwater is handed handled by ecological systems.
It supports biodiversity.
Coastal parks, um, uh, provide coastal protection as well
as, um, walking opportunities.
Schools, shops, community buildings are
integrated all together.
It directly results in people accepting smaller private
lots, higher density, because shared spaces
are highly connected.
This is a connected, friendly, safe place to be.
But again, the qualities that make Hobsonville successful,
the ones that Clause 14 removed from scope,
and this is what happens when those concepts are removed.
This is Nupe had so much potential similar to Hobsonville,
but the results are significantly different.
It's an area of Auckland that had no spatial plan,
no foundations in landscape.
It was a copycat of building form,
but without the integration of landscape components.
And as a result, neighborhood identity is lost.
Car dependency, dependency is higher.
Infrastructure requires higher maintenance and management.
Unfortunately, these outcomes were predictable
and avoidable for no applied does not
thrive like Hobsonville.
It is transient, much more transient,
and there is less sense of community this matters.
It signals the start of a decline in performance,
a residential environment
that will become more troublesome over time.
It may have been cheaper to build this in the first place,
but ultra ultimately retrofitting is the only way we'll
save PPA in the future.
But we know, 'cause we've seen it
before, we've seen residential VA environments
that lack core landscape values.
They, they show a clear decline in value livability
and social cohesion over time.
It's better to build it right in the first place.
But as we've said, clause 14 removes the tools needed
to avoid repeats of environments such as this.
We're not just talking about urban rural.
Is this is the same, this is the landing in Northland.
Yeah, sure. You know, um, yeah, yeah.
I mean, it's a wonderful example.
Bottle Check does a wonderful example using landscape
to consider diversification.
It integrates environmental protection
with traditional farming, viticulture, heritage tourism,
visitor experience, productions, the whole works.
Um, it relies on freshwater system, ecological patterns,
the backbone of mountains de sea systems thinking.
Now you could say, you know, that this is for the rich,
but the Landing provides for the local economy.
It provides diversity and employment skills.
It's been setting an example with neighboring sites, imp,
Prairie River Peninsula, following suit
for the wider country, the concepts
that underpin the thinking of the landing of apply
to a rural landscape, embracing environmental systems
and networks to support long-term farm management.
The consideration and enabling of diversity
that works with such systems.
Consideration, identity sense, place, context,
that's landscape thinking that underpins rural diversity.
It's not about restricting the building of a shed.
Rather what we're talking about is working
with the landscape and environment
to build on its potential.
Protecting the value of productive soil, productive use,
utilizing poor quality land farms
for alternative productive outcomes that also provide
for environmental protections.
Planning should enable and protect these opportunities.
And in our opinion, again,
clause 14 removes the tools necessary to think about that.
Staying rural. This is ton a West coast town,
historically supported by large scale forestry mining.
Whilst these industries still operate,
they're much more self-sufficient.
These days, more automated towns such as Ton
or TR Amru, gray Town, Russell, our town,
are finding it increasingly difficult
to survive on rural services alone.
They need a hook and they're finding that hook
through landscape and what I call deliberate amenity
landscape and heritage overlays and I,
and I say heritage in quotes, it created a new aesthetic.
These are not heritage buildings,
but they're building on a heritage to create an identity.
This overlay not only creates a sense of community identity,
they underpin a strategy for such towns to survive.
This grew from the community with the council, failing
to have such controls, risks,
non invested non-local companies
to undermine wider community aspirations and outcomes.
Again, fundamental goal of the bills.
But Section 14 removes the tools for these to be considered.
And similarly, regulatory relief mechanisms.
Disincentivize such overlays to be created
and managed even if they're wanted.
Catherine, something closer to home.
Um, landscape considerations, underpin departures.
Spatial plans provide strategic direction
not for prescription.
As we've explored local context matters.
Spatial plans can set a good direction,
but they can't cater for every outcome,
nor can they easily predict future paths at this site.
And Havelock North desired outcome
for the loan from the landowner
was more intensive community offerings, more space offices,
restaurants, and currently in development homes.
But Havelock North was controlled
by community agreed rules in the district plan,
including limitations on height.
These buildings were built, uh, to respond
to Havelock North's unique character.
Their building form
and appearance gave the license
to explore a departure from the rules.
It allowed them to build more intensive than
what the spatial plan or the district plan was proposing.
The results speaks for itself. It's highly desirable.
Tenancy. Tenancy
and has created a, an amazing network
of hospitality on office offerings
that has enriched Tablo North social culture.
These are landscape
and amenity considerations that, that underpin growth
and and development.
But Clause 14 removes them.
What we're talking about here is acceptance.
We asked you to think about earlier.
Um, you know, everyone's connected to places.
What is it about that connection?
Home is not just your house, it's the memories
and experience in the house.
The link from physical to perception, the social values
that landscape encompasses the per park.
Uh, in re found out the hard way
was a government led housing development scooted
through a consenting process with little
engagement with the community.
It became contentious.
Even a national party MP got involved in,
voiced his displeasure with the proposal.
As a result, development stalled more deeper.
Community ca engagement was needed.
Locals shared their knowledge of movement patterns, shading,
safety concerns, hazards.
The learnings resulted in a reconsideration of the proposal.
It's layout how integrated in the business community.
It was a delay, but now it thrives. It's one award.
So it's turned around. Natural justice suggests
that actually local people have the right to be heard
and they can input positively again, the bills.
Remove that departure. Two slides to go.
And we, we can have have a chat.
Yeah. You've got literally a couple more minutes. Yeah.
So infrastructure is another one.
Landscape in this sit situation allows us
to integrate infrastructure into places really easily.
The control of planting in this hides a, um,
a necessary infrastructure from immediately adjacent
presidential properties.
So this is our conclusion.
Um, I may think I'll, I'll skip, I'll skip through this,
but we ask you to, to listen to what the roo
of the world say, land landscape, underpins planning
and environmental legislation.
That's the key to economic success.
It's our country's brand proposition, our way of life.
It makes our home hope
and it's the key to what makes our places special to us.
Thanks.
Look, thank you very much, Shannon.
We've got a couple of questions. Yeah.
We'll go first to Grant. Yeah.
Look. Fantastic presentation.
And I can concur about the landing.
Peter Cooper's done a great job there.
One, he does use a mower to mow 200 acres of the land.
So, yeah.
But anyway, putting that aside, um, my question is,
I struck, um, we went and visited a high country farm
and the rules down there, sorry, the, the rules down there,
um, uh, restricted about where you could build a fence.
I not allowed on the ridge, which is the logical place.
Any farmer is gonna build a fence.
And, and that's kind of
what I think what you're doing is amazing.
But if you go to a rural area, you,
you don't mind seeing a fence on a hills on a ridge.
Mm-hmm. So how have we got to that point?
'cause it undermines what you guys are trying to do.
I couldn't agree with you more.
Yeah, it seems ridiculous, quite frankly.
Um, fencing is part of a rural landscape. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
It, it should happen where it needs to happen.
So it's not something that I can imagine landscape
architects would engage with in terms of debating.
Clearly someone does.
It comes through in, in, in in plans.
It gets caught up into district plans
and then the district policies.
And what we see is a lot of, um,
council planners in particular who see those as tick boxes
and go, well, we, we have to consider that.
We have to consider that, and we have to get a report on
that and have to get a report on that.
What we've been trying to do with the is say,
actually it's not about that.
It's not about she defense, it's about overall character.
Yeah. And, and keep it at that, at that strategic high level
because that's so critically important to all
of us in, in how we live.
Just a supplementary on that from
Juliet. Well, yeah, I was gonna
ask a similar question
and specifically about clause removing cla, um,
the effect on landscape from consideration through clause,
um, 14 h um, I thought that was driven by these sorts
of things as well as like, um,
renewable generation in the form
of windmills being blocked on the basis of landscape.
And I just wanted to ask you, do you think that a lot of
what you are talking about, um, in terms of, um,
the value from landscape architecture could actually be
considered within the definition
of well-functioning urban environment and
therefore isn't excluded that even though
landscape here is excluded, it's just like
that over simplistic visual aspect,
but not the, well, the components which lead
to a well-functioning urban environment?
I, I don't think you can separate
landscape from well functioning.
It's, it is, it's a full underpinning of
what well Franklin environment actually means to people.
So you can't pull that, um, pull that out.
I think what we are talking about here is changing
to a system that allows outcome focused thinking
and much more structured thinking.
And we're moving away from a system
that's about ticking the rule boxes.
Yeah. And in doing that, changing the system,
then we should be able to consider effects in
that system at the right, at the right level
because the outcome is really, really clear
and the system allows for that.
And the fast track has proved exactly that.
You know, my reference to the South Wind Farm that got
through, definitely wind farms have not got
through on landscape grounds.
If you open the, the hood underneath those,
and you look at those wind farms, they didn't get
through for a very good reason.
Um, you know, the Waku one that I worked on, it was,
it was a bad development right through.
So landscape gets the blame for it.
It wasn't just landscape in the case.
There were, there were problems right.
Through the whole thing. Mm-hmm.
Good developments get through.
But I guess in terms of amending the legislation,
do you think that we would better capture, um,
the integrated approach
and outcomes approach that you're talking about through, um,
maybe having a, a definition
of well-functioning urban environments?
Or do you think it's removing, uh, 14 H
and saying landscape can be considered?
Uh, well, we're saying you have to consider landscape.
You, you have to, in order to create,
even if you've got a definition
of well-functioning environments, that definition
by default is going to refer to landscape terms in it.
So you can't say, here's the goal
to deliver a well-functioning environment,
which is based on the whole concept of premise of landscape.
And then say, oh, but you actually can't consider landscape.
They, they're mutually exclusive to, to do that.
You have to have both. They have to work together.
Uh, thank you. Um, Priyanka has a question.
Um, thank you. And also,
these are the most beautiful guidelines.
I Nice.
Um, so the, I don't know whether you've considered this,
but the Natural
and Built Environments Act, um, had embedded
landscapes in the environmental outcomes plus the national
planning frameworks, for example.
Um, how, how do, how does the totality
of your recommendations here compared to
what was in that act?
Similar concepts?
Uh, we had just released the Tony at the time
of the natural born environment.
I sat, I think it was that room over there.
Um, we said pretty much the same things, um, that actually
what we're interested in, we're not interested in, you know,
the particular placement of that.
What we're really interested in is that full understanding
and that full outcome focused.
That's what delivers well function.
That's what delivers places that people cherish and love.
Now, sometimes that means you might have
to paint a shed a certain color
because that landscape, that coastal place, for example,
you know, the shed sits there bright white and,
and reduces the value of that place.
So we've gotta understand that.
But if you come back to those values
and understand it at a much broader level, it's amazing
what can get a, what can happen sort
of at ground level and still be enabled.
And, and do you think that the MBEA achieved that,
Uh, didn't go as far as we wanted it to.
Okay. But further than that,
Uh, further than that, yeah.
Well, way further than this now. Yeah. Yeah.
This, this does the opposite.
It, it, it, it removes all of those considerations entirely.
Thank you. Thank you.
Look, I just wanna jump in, um, with page 58
of your submission and the area on regulatory relief,
because that's come up, uh, a lot.
And I see that you are very, very against regulatory relief
and you've made that very clear in your submission.
Um, whereas we've had other submitters that have, have
provided kind of other solutions
where we could potentially tweak it slightly here
or there to find the right balance.
Can you, because I would've thought that a lot
of your businesses that you represent
and a lot of architects, landscape architects, um, you know,
would face this quite a lot where, you know,
obviously the property owner suddenly has a issue
with being able to do anything on that particular land
because of, um, some something that's arisen.
Um, you know, why are you so against that
and, uh, what is your solution?
Um, we probably haven't gone into it in the detail
that a lot of others have because they have.
Um, so we've, we've set our position.
What we're concerned about is, for example, the situation.
If regulatory relief is required underneath that, then,
then, then overlay wouldn't, wouldn't happen.
Um, and there's this tension always isn't there between
how much a community has a responsibility for, for
where we live and how it is and,
and the impact on one individual.
Correct. What we are really concerned about is that
the places that are really special to a community
will not get the protections that they, that they need,
But Okay. Supplementary.
Yeah. Just
So isn't that the point though, if the community values it
that much, then they'll be quite happy to say, yes,
we will compensate that particular landowner
for the impact on that.
Surely that's the whole point. Mm,
Yep. Simon.
Yeah, I mean it does, in my opinion,
it does go a little bit further beyond that.
And to me, it sort
of places an economic lens over landscape values
and it poses the risk of, of devaluing those sort
of landscape values of our outstanding natural landscapes,
because councils may not be able to afford the relief
that is required by their protection.
Um, Cameron, Could I just add to that?
I'm aware of three districts
that I'm working in at the moment, Southland, Klu,
and Tasman district, which are behind the eight ball.
You know, they're really late to the party in terms
of ident, identifying their outstanding natural landscapes.
And I guess, you know, e even just
identifying outstanding natural landscapes.
We've done a lot of consultation and Tasman,
and you've got, you know, people at this end
of the spectrum, people at that end of the spectrum,
these guys wanting, you know, heaps
of the district identified those guys wanting
hardly anything identified.
So we've already got very disparate views
if you add the financial layer into it,
which potentially I would imagine has an implication
for the councils in terms of, um, uh,
administering and, um, determining the level
of regulatory relief.
I actually just think it's gonna be even more complicated.
Well, can I put to you then that, um, I mean,
a long time ago we moved away from the barter system when we
could no longer figure out the intrinsic value, the sort
of people on the spectrum you just described.
Yes. Um, subjective of values to try
and come up with a system
and barter across whether yes, um,
something's more or less valuable.
I put it to you that, um, the very tension
that you are saying exists
and would be exemplified, would actually be, uh, limited
by putting that, recognizing that the landowner's impact
as part of the equation, saying this is the value.
Um, and that would actually put it out there in a way
that the tension can be resolved by actually
identifying what is at stake.
Yeah. So I, I guess I'd ask you to think about the, um,
potential chilling effect
that could have on councils actually
identifying those overlays.
And then also, how much of a problem is it in reality?
And I say that having worked through the Tasman
consultation stakeholder engagement, um, with, sorry, can I,
We are gonna have to, we'll, sorry.
Yeah, just, just, Cameron will let let
her finish. Thank you. Uh,
With a lot of, like, with a lot of landowners
who are very concerned
for the very reasons you are talking about,
would it limit their, um, ability to use their land,
develop it, et cetera.
And there is a way through of, um, uh,
drafting the policy constructs that go with those overlays
that enable people to use their land in a reasonable way.
Look, I think we will leave it there
because we have gone quite well over time on
your particular submission.
And I know Shannon has got his, uh, submission, uh,
with Wayfinder.
Um, I'm not sure how you wanted to present that, Shannon,
if you wanted to do that with your
colleagues or, um, before we start,
These guys all step away and then,
Okay. Okay. I just,
Cameron just had one last Yeah.
Point of order. Just a point of order on,
Um, you know, like I think having other members jump in
Brian up, uh, whether someone's stepping over
by asking questions to clarify answers.
It's one thing, but I just thought you reflect on, uh,
before I asked myself, um, I was spoken over
and I'm quite happily let that go
and waited for submitted a finish.
I just hope that if members are gonna start jumping in on
other people's interactions,
they take into account the previous 30 seconds.
Okay. No, well thank you for that feedback.
Um, Cameron, look, it's, uh, we do wanna make sure that we,
uh, give the submitters a, a fair chance to be able
to get answer the questions and feedback.
And so, um, I obviously gave that right to the submitter,
and we thank you for that.
And, uh, thank you very much for your time today,
um, for that submission.
Uh, you know, a really interesting perspective
and great to see some fantastic projects around the country,
including, uh, the great project and have lot more points.
So, um, Shannon, we'll now move on to your submission.
So thank you. We'll hand it over to you.
Uh, thank you, um, and for entertaining me for so long.
It's great. Um, yeah, look, New Zealand matters to me.
I've spent 10 years traveling, um, abroad.
It was in my blood to return here.
Um, I've been practicing the landscape back
to about 25 years past president
and past chair of the legislation committee for institute.
I'm a business in, uh, Hawke's Bay.
And I just wanna take you through a couple of, uh, projects
that we, we've done.
I mean, I've worked on resource consents, environment,
court hearings, board inquiries, fast
tracks across the board.
Um, and what I see is landscape is more than a connection.
It's what we said before.
It defines who people are,
where they come from, where they're heading.
Um, it helps us trust, identify, uh, it helps with trust,
identity, and local connection.
Um, I choose to live here and I, and I absolutely love it.
Um, you know, this was a project that we worked on,
um, by pippi.
In fact, I was a commissioner. Um, we granted this proposal.
Um, you know, and I think for us,
landscape is more about visual immunity or what you see.
It's how people experience and feel about the change.
Um, and our job really is to try and help with that process.
Help people accept and understand what's happening.
Um, it's, it landscape's a motive of, of course it is.
Um, we love home, we love the place around us.
We feel we have a sense of ownership,
even if their name's not on the title.
I mean, they're principles that really we steal from,
from defender, AHI Ka.
And we adopted in our, in our work, um, you know,
people love renewable energy
and they love sustainable technology,
but they f they sometimes fear change.
And that's the battle that we deal with on a,
on a landscape basis in our view.
It's better to battle of that
in the system rather than outside it.
It will come back to it later if we don't think about
it through the process.
Um, anyone who's driven down the southern, um,
southern motorway in Auckland will
potentially recognize the southern corridor.
I've worked on this project for far longer
than I really wanted to.
Um, but you know, what I really wanna say about this is
that infrastructure is not just about steel
and concrete experience and connection matter too.
Um, we all know the New Zealand roadie roads must be safe,
efficient, cost effective, easy, maintain.
Sure, sure. But actually
what we're also talking about here is
not the route from A to B.
It's the journey in between.
Roads are our window
or our entry to the New Zealand landscape.
That's how we see it. It's how our tourists see it.
We all know that feeling
of christening over the hill to the beach.
We, we can, we can picture it, we can remember it.
Um, the feeling of, you know, almost reaching the boundary
of your hometown and going, I'm nearly home.
Those sorts of things. So that's infrastructure.
It's actually more about just building the,
the, the asphalt on the ground.
It's thinking about those things,
and that's why people get concerned and, and,
and emotive about it.
But also in projects like this, we plant things.
We planted 250,000 natives in this.
It wasn't about beautification.
It's actually operational cost saving planting, um,
actually becomes cheaper than mowing
after about six or seven years.
So it's, it's better.
It also provides biodiversity outcomes.
It's a sustainable seed source for, for most of Auckland.
It provides diversity. All of those, um, great things.
These are things that are built into infrastructure
that are driven by landscape.
Um, and why we think it needs to be in, you know,
talking contr, um, controversy.
Uh, I promised my Spark client that I show 'em, um,
this, uh, this image.
We, we do a lot of these, we do a lot of cell phone towers.
And you say, what's the landscape Arctic
doing this with a cell phone tower?
There's no planting involved. You're absolutely right.
There's not, but people hate cell phone towers. Oh yeah.
Um, they absolutely hate them,
but you'll be amazed how many are around you
that you actually can't see,
or you're not really sure of where they are.
And that's because landscape amenity with considerations,
the slim line post on that, the way that we've managed
to just move it to the, to a few meters to the right means
that it's not dominating the house next to us.
These are the little, little cues
that make quite a big difference when
you're talking about infrastructure.
And it allows us to effectively hide them in plain sight.
Um, so it's really important stuff.
Um, this of course is our, our most favorite project.
Well, Catherine will know this exceptionally well. Yes.
Um, um, if you haven't seen, this is why Aha and,
and, um, has Hastings, it came from the, uh, the,
the have border crisis.
So five people died, 3000 people got sick,
50 people hospitalized.
Local economy took a $30 million hit.
I think trust in council
and council infrastructure absolutely collapsed.
People were afraid to turn the tap on.
Now, we started this site where, this was the response
after the councils decided to stop sewing each other.
We went to this and, and we looked at an industrial site,
but nobody wants to get their drinking water
from an industrial site.
We looked at a rural properties
because they were easy to get hold of,
but that meant millions
and millions of dollars of greening the pipes into town.
Actually, the best site to put this was a green
space in the middle of the city.
So how could we do that?
Well, we had to think about how to integrate it,
but more than that, we needed the community
to trust this infrastructure.
We needed to design for honesty.
And so we put a window on the water treatment plant building
so that people could just look in
and go, oh, that's what's going on.
I now have a much more of a degree in trust.
That's what we're talking about.
Landscape, visual amenity outcomes. That's that involvement.
So that's sort of the work we do.
Um, this is another lovely little havelock north shop.
This, this is restoring the havelock North
waterways after the cyclone.
And this is what we're talking about.
It's about, uh, acceptance.
It's about trust, and it's about experience.
This is about all three landscape absolutely can be cost
of projects, but when you start thinking about the broader
social, um, environmental outcomes,
and you start thinking about long-term maintenance outcomes,
including landscape
and projects, including as a, as a requirement,
makes such a difference.
But yeah, welcome your questions.
Yeah, thanks Shannon.
Uh, look, we'll start with Julie Ann
Genter, who has a question.
Thank you. I was just wondering if you think that, um,
in your experience, private developers
and land bankers, um, will have the foresight
to implement these kind
of holistic solutions on their own all the time?
Or is there a role for community through planning roles
and as pa, regional spatial plans, et cetera,
to think about the longer term holistic impact and,
and give them the incentives to,
to actually bring landscape architecture
into their developments?
Uh, I was talking to a, um, uh, energy company,
a state client, solar farm that, um, they're building.
We're having exactly that conversation.
Um, the, the, uh, the big companies
that have social and environmental policies
and responsibilities, absolutely they'll do it.
Of course. We'll, we'll, we'll be fine, you know,
but what's gonna happen is more and more rogues will come in
because the legislation won't require
that level of thinking.
And so they won't do it because it's, they'll,
they'll go for the cheap option.
And so, so, so that'll undermine it.
And so then what starts to happen is
that those larger companies
that have their social environmental policies,
their boards will say, well, hang on a minute.
If if they're not doing it
and you're getting away with it, why do we need to?
And that's, that's, I think, is a real concern.
And when I explained that to our client yesterday, she said,
no, you're absolutely right.
Thanks. Thank you. Um, look, lovely to see all these, uh,
pictures of always amazing, your
Hometown. There we
Go around Hawkes Bay, Hawkes Bay.
But you know, a lot of the theme, um, you know, of your
submission is placed based understanding.
Um, and if I look at, you know, the,
the Ang Regional Park there
and then the awa, you know,
which I understand you won some amazing award score
and it was very much focused on the, the place.
Could you just elaborate a little bit further from a, um,
I suppose a landscape architecture point of view, you know,
why you see that as, um, so important and the, you know,
and how you feel the legislation as it's currently, um,
drafted, doesn't, uh, put enough emphasis on that?
Yeah, look, I think it goes back to what, as
before, you know, we, I love New Zealand.
I, you know, New Zealand has an identity of its own,
it's different to any other country.
That's why we love living here.
In fact, I love living in Havelock North
because it's got an identity
that's different to any other town.
In fact, I really like living in my street
because that street has got its own identity.
And, and that's what we're talking about, is
that you actually, you, you choose where you live.
A lot of people choose where they live in that,
and they have a con such a strong connection to that place.
And they're really proud of it.
And, and that pride, um, delivers, um,
excitement and, and,
and it helps those places live and thrive.
So we don't want cookie cutter New Zealand.
We don't want every town centered to be the same.
If, if you've been to England recently
and you walk down on any main street in any town in England,
it is identical, absolutely identical.
So for us, place is about context.
It's really about trying to understand what,
what makes this place different to anywhere else.
What makes it special to the people that that live here?
What, what are they going to shout about
and why are they gonna say, Hey,
you should come to my place.
'cause it's really great. Um,
and I think, you know, going back
to my earlier presentation, you know,
Christchurch has just done that.
It's spade isn't, it's just said, Hey man, you know, come
and live in Christchurch 'cause it's the best place to be.
Um, Grant's got a supplementary on that.
Um, a quick point then a question that I, to your point,
you showed a, um, I presume it was a, um, coor development
and the one in, uh, in Yeah, well,
we had a similar experience in even exploded.
A certain National party candidate might have objected to it
and then along, but what it did lead
to is a community pushback really hard on a particular
development, and they got it redesigned
because what was designed was just not practical and not,
and to the sorts of things that you pointed out.
So, you know, there, there, there's a real place
to make sure you get the actual development of space
where people want to live there.
It's not just a cheap bang it up, it's done job.
But the, the question I have is,
change is the big thing when you like it.
It's, it had, this is,
and I good example
where I live from my beautiful rural
view, from my farmhouse.
Um, and then the neighbor sold his dairy farm
to a free range cho business,
and they've built seven free range chook barns, right?
So the, the landscape completely changed, right?
So I could have, you know, putting aside what the rules may
or may have been, could have objective,
you can't do that, blah, blah, blah.
Um, yet they've got a really good business.
They run it well from what I can tell, et cetera.
So how managing that change to landscape to allow
economic development, how do you approach that?
That's what we do on a daily basis.
I mean, that's, that's exactly
what we're talking about here is understanding, well,
what are the values that make this place special?
And, and how does that changing?
And how do we explain those changes?
How do we people, um, get people
to understand and accept it?
I wrote an article several years ago, um, for a paper, uh,
and it was looking at NIMBYs and,
and you know, we, we all hate, we all hate NIMBYs.
We all go, oh, you know, here they go again.
And I changed it to MBIs thoughtfully in my backyard.
That's actually what people want,
is they just want the opportunity to be able to be involved,
to be heard, to, to, to say something
and say, Hey, look, you know what?
Build your sheds, but could you just paint them dark color?
Or would you mind just moving them over there?
We, we did a cell phone the other day,
uh, in a rural environment.
It was gonna be right outside somebody's house.
I said to, um, spark
and I said, look, can we move it 50 meters that way?
And they went, yeah, done. Good. Right? Sorted.
And this is, it was normal. This is part
of the reason why we support the new system is
'cause it's not necessarily, you know,
you, you are comfortable with it.
Your relationship with your place, you are happy
for that activity to happen.
And so as landscape architects,
we don't wanna get in the way of that.
So that's why we have support for this new planning system.
It's those, it exceptions.
It's those things where it is gonna
impact people's relationship.
That's where we think the land landscape still needs
to be included so that we can provide the solutions.
And in that case, if you really didn't want to see that,
we could facilitate that development could still go ahead,
but we could, we could make it in a way
that you are happy as well. So
Look, thank you. I think
that's a good place to leave it.
It's been, um, you know, really, really valuable
to get the architecture kind of view on everything.
And, and look, we, uh, thank
and congratulate your members
for all the amazing work they're doing across New Zealand.
Yeah, it's good stuff to, uh, you know, design incredible,
uh, landscapes for us.
So, uh, thank you very much for your time today
and for the feedback and the considerations.
Appreciate it. Thanks for letting us go over.
Great, great tactic local space. So, well, yes.
You know, and we invite everyone.
Look,
thank you.
Look, um, we now invite our, uh, very last, uh, submitter
for this session, uh,
the Resource Management Law Association.
Uh, welcome to the Select committee.
Um, look, you have 20 minutes with us, so, uh,
we'll hand it over to you, uh, to talk us
through your submission, and then we'll open up questions.
Good afternoon.
Good afternoon. Uh,
Ana Lauren Wallace.
Uh, so good afternoon, Madam Chair and committee members.
My name is Lauren Wallace
and I am the president
of the Resource Management Law Association, uh,
which is currently, uh, or commonly known as the, um, RMLA.
Uh, I'm here today with Andrew Beatson, uh,
resource Management barrister,
and the lead of our working group on these reforms, uh,
and hopefully online with us, yes, is Kate Stubbing,
who is our secretary.
Uh, she had intended to be here today,
but unfortunately all the
flights out of Taron were canceled. So
Yes, She is with us online.
So, firstly, uh, we thank you for the opportunity to, uh,
speak to you today on our submission.
Um, by way of brief introduction, uh,
in case you have not heard of the RMLA, uh,
we are New Zealand's leading multidisciplinary association
focused on environmental
and resource management, law, policy and practice.
Our membership includes more than a thousand practitioners
from across the resource management sector,
including lawyers, planners, judges,
environmental consultants, landscape architects, engineers,
uh, local, uh, authority officers
and elected members, policy analysts,
and industry representatives.
Reflecting this diversity, our members hold a wide range
of perspectives on resource management issues.
But notwithstanding this, um,
the RMA r MLA's core objectives include
to promote within New Zealand
excellence in resource management, policy and practice,
and legally sound effective
and efficient resource management processes
that deliver high quality environmental outcomes.
So in developing our submission,
we undertook broad engagement with our membership, um,
including, uh, several webinar webinars
and a membership survey
and a working group, which Andrew led was also convened
to provide the substantive input into, um,
this little bundle.
Um, at a high level, the RMLA supports reform
of New Zealand's resource management system,
and we consider that the planning bill
and the natural environment Bill introduced a number
of positive out, uh, positive concepts and processes.
However, as currently drafted, the bills contain structural,
procedural, and substantive issues
that risk undermining certainty, efficiency,
and the achievement of high quality land use, planning,
development, and environmental outcomes.
Our submission therefore recommends targeted
and in some cases, material amendments
to ensure the new system is legally robust,
workable, and enduring.
While we understand that our written submission is
to be taken as read, uh, we thought it would be useful just
to highlight several of the key, uh, issues within here
to save you reading it in case we haven't, uh,
that we have identified.
So, um, I have 10 issues that I'll just run
through recently quickly.
Um, the first is the two bill architecture.
We, uh, consider this creates risks of inconsistency,
duplication, and unresolved conflict
where activities engage both statutes simultaneously
unless the bills are amalgamated.
We recommend a provision requiring joint hearings
and coordinated decisions
where activities require consents under both bills
and guidance about which statute prevails
or on what basis conflicts are to be resolved.
Where the requirements are inconsistent.
We support the funnel concept and standardization.
However, the success of the funnel
and goals will depend heavily on natural national direction.
And as this has not yet been developed, it's unclear
how these goals will be applied.
In practice. RMLA recommends a hierarchy among the goals,
or that a statutory mechanism for resolving
conflict is provided.
The purpose provisions in both bills are largely procedural
rather than substantive.
And I know that the submission's been made by others, uh,
and the legal effect of the requirements to seek
to achieve the stated goals is uncertain and untested.
This creates a real risk of disputes over the hierarchy
and weighting off the goals.
RMLA considers the legislation should adopt
a clearer purpose statement
and provide greater clarity around the relative weight
of goals and how conflict between them is to be resolved.
Uh, 0.4, in terms of environmental limits,
while we consider the framework as sound
and concept, there are questions about
how it'll operate in practice
and whether it will deliver the intended
environmental outcomes.
In particular, concerns arise from the absence of targets,
the ability for regional councils to set standards
below national bottom lines, the lack of clarity around
how exclusions will operate
and for the framework to function effectively, limits
and standards must have a clear scientific basis.
We think we need to be realistic about the importance
and magnitude of this task
and whether it can be undertaken in the timeframes, uh,
indicated in the bills like five is around, uh,
Maori rights and interests.
The bills weaken existing protections
by replacing operative treaty obligations
with largely descriptive provisions.
And by qualifying treaty settlement redress,
the Maori interest goal also lacks priority
and may be outweighed by development objectives.
RMLA therefore recommends the inclusion
of an operative treaty clause, removal
of the settlement qualification
and stronger mechanisms for meaningful Maori engagement.
Point six, the inclusion
of the broadly framed regulatory relief powers is not
supported by RMLA and RMLA re recommends its removal
or significant narrowing.
Uh, in terms of 0.7, uh, in relation to consenting
and notification, we think the new bills provide an
opportunity to simplify a notification,
but the restrict restructured provisions
and new tests appear to add complexity.
The addition of a qualifying resident restriction
adds unnecessary complications,
and we think one option could simply be to require
targeted notification where effects are minor
or more than minor, and all affected persons can be
identified, or public notification
where the effects are more than minor
and it's impractical to identify all affected persons.
Uh, there was also strong opposition to
and concerns about the workability
of the permitted activity regime, which appears
to be at odds
with the government stated objectives for this reform.
Uh, as drafted, it will be administratively burdensome,
burdensome for councils and applicants alike.
Uh, in terms of 0.9, um, RMLA submits
that a comprehensive cross-referencing
and definitions audit is needed.
The bills contain a number of errors in cross
cross-referencing errors and create clause numbering
and inconsistent terminology
between similar provisions in each bill.
Um, so this will of course create
implementation difficulties.
Uh, finally, the statutory timeframes
for first generation instruments appear overly ambitious.
When measured against current sector capacity,
the simultaneous demands across all regions create a real
risk that the transition will be compromised
and that the objectives
of the new system will not be realized consistently.
Overall, we received strong
and consistent feedback that members are seeking a robust
and enduring form.
They seek bipartisan agreement on an appropriate regulatory
framework and want to get away from the politicization.
That is characterized resource management policy making in
recent times, a key message
that we received from our members was a plea
to this committee to carefully consider the
recommendations we
and other submitters have made so as
to strengthen these bills so that they are enduring,
and so that those who are working
and trying to operate in the resource management STA space
can finally do so with a degree of certainty.
Uh, so, uh, that's our brief summary
and we are happy to take questions.
Look, thank you very much.
We've got a few questions, uh, we'll start with Lam,
Tina Cordura, thank you for your submission.
Um, we've heard some really strong submissions from
Iwi Maori, but particularly settlement entities, uh, about
how, um, I guess like devastating these bills might be
for their involvement.
Can you give us an idea of how integral
Maori performing and acting in good faith in the system is
because basically they're saying essentially their good
faith is running out.
Look, I think, um, I, I heard the, that,
that the submissions from, and, um,
and I thought they were very powerful.
Um, and I do understand their position
that their settlements were arrived in, in the context of a,
of a framework that enabled participation.
Um, and I look, I, I think,
I think Murray, um, that they, they, they,
they meaningfully engage.
They, they're really important participants, um,
for constitutional reasons as well as
because of the particular perspective
that they bring to the table.
Um, at times they're, they're under-resourced
and that can constrain their ability
to have meaningful input.
Um, so those are, those are existing problems.
Um, but I'm, I'm not sure that, well, I don't think
that this, um, set of reforms does anything to,
to address those problems.
And I think it, you know, it really undermines,
as you would've heard from those where you did hear from
those submitters, it really undermines that
the settlement arrangements that they entered into, in,
in good faith under a particular
understanding that that's moving.
And we've just got a supplementary on that from Grant.
Yeah. Um, I'm pleased you watched those, um,
submission stuff for the other day.
Um, then, because I I, my, my concern is that they indicated
what particular TA did that they like
to be involved at every level of the process, uh,
including the actual issue of the,
the consent application from the, the farm
or the business person or whatever that person,
that situation may be.
And does that, I mean, is that
all from, from, from my perspective, surely we'd better, uh,
have their say in, in the, in the overall planning stage,
the, the policy stage, so that then it was, um,
and then you wouldn't have that challenge on resource
as you highlighted so that they then,
and then they had their involvements here,
so then the process takes care of itself down further down
below, rather than having to every single consent
that they get involved in it
and it, it stretches resource and takes more time.
Yeah, there's probably two key responses to that.
The, the, the first one is that
I think this new framework curtails their involvement at the
national direction level, and we've got a funnel, um,
so there's a, a requirement for consultation with iwi,
but limited timeframe, um, for that
to, to take place within.
So got concerns about their ability at that higher level
to have effective input
that will then influence whatever happens down below.
Um, and then I think there are questions about,
about resourcing and their ability to participate at
that plan level, um,
and the practicality of having
to identify all their interests at the, at the plan level.
Um, so there's a, there's a few issues there.
Um, but I do, I do take the, the point that they can also,
because they're resource constrained, um, find it difficult
to be across everything at the, at the ground level.
And that's been my own experience as a,
as a practitioner in this space.
Um, but I wouldn't wanna see their, um, their, their old
materially diminished, um, by this
Reform. But I mean, I, I,
I can speak to, um, um,
farming families have discussed it with me that they have
to, that they, they, they work through their process
and they've also gotta work on, on this is for consent
to farm, for example, and they've gotta work and they,
and they've gotta work with the local, um, Harper
or Iwi at that point as well, which is, which is, and,
and every individual's case and it, and it can,
and they, it that then adds a lot of stress
and time into the whole process for, for them and,
and a lot of uncertainty.
We, whereas, you know, because they
don't know where it's gonna go.
So is your Question. Yeah. So what I mean, yeah.
So what, um, what, what,
What you just making a statement? No,
No, no, no. What's the, so
what's, what is a, is what, how can we solve,
prevent that from being the case from a
applicant's point of view?
Oh, a resourcing I ha would be a good start.
Um, but I, I don't think it's the case that Iwi
and Hapu get involved in every single consent.
Certainly not in, in my region. Perhaps yours, I'm not sure.
Um, some of the iwi and hapu who have settlements
and who are well resourced do make calls on the consents
that they wanna get involved rather than
the consents that they don't.
Uh, in terms of rural spaces, it's usually
water related, I would assume. And,
And the, and the consent,
Uh, look, moving on, uh, Julie and Jen have a question.
Um, you raise a really good point around, um,
the concentration of, um,
national direction in the hands of a minister,
and you've recommended a lot of amendments
to try and address some of that.
I just wondered if given the importance of having coherent,
longstanding national direction for this whole system
to work well, we should be thinking about if you have any
views on whether we should be thinking about having a board
of inquiry process for setting the national
direction as well.
Yeah, and, and that is, um, one
of the recommendations we make in the submission, um,
these national directions to work well, they need
to be like, national direction
to date has been a real mixed bag.
Um, and where it goes wrong,
it can have pretty significant implication.
I think we've seen that across the country
in, in various forms.
So, um, we would strongly imp employ the government
to take its time to get that.
If that first step is done well, the rest
of the funnel will work well.
But if it's not, we're gonna have
like administrative lag every time a plan needs
to get updated to try
and redress whatever was wrong at that level.
Supportive inquiries.
One of the things that we, we mentioned there are a couple
of other things we mentioned, uh,
regulatory impact statements, pub, you know, publishing, um,
drafts and then, and then reasons, uh, and,
and summary of consultation and reasons
and responses to sub to, to, to consultation.
I think the key point is, it's just so fundamental.
We've gotta get it right. And the other thing
that concerns us is if it's too easy to change,
you get into this flip flop every time the government
changes, you get a, you get a wild swing
and the the system needs to, um, adjust
and take that into account and, and it,
and it's just frankly exhausting for, for practitioners
and uncertain for participants in the
system. It's an nightmare.
Hugely costly for councils.
Um, look, I just wanted to ask a question
around the visual amenity and landscape.
Um, 'cause we obviously had the landscape
architects some earlier
Who also raised This as a concern.
And in your submission, um,
you are talking about urban areas
and how you can actually define well functioning.
That's obviously something that you have raised here.
Um, what is your actual recommendation
and solution in regards to that?
And perhaps have you had experience in this area
where you feel that the current legislation
as it's written is not going
to put enough focus on this particular issue?
Um, RMLA endorses the, uh, landscape, um,
architects Association submission on that, on that front.
Um, we do think that it will be incredibly difficult
to, uh, assess whether a,
an environment is well functioning without the components
of landscape and visual immunity.
Um, in terms of our recommendation, sorry, I have
to go sm I haven't got it memorized, but, um, I think
That's on page 23. Thank
You. I think one of
the recommendations was to delete, um,
delete that from clause
1414 E Yeah.
Yeah. So to delete that
and to delete landscape, alternatively, it's around actually
putting in place, um, national direction on how okay,
you go about determining
what well functioning urban environments or rural
or, um, as these guys have recommended postal
or natural environments, what, what that means,
what it looks like, what we have to assess
and how, you know, when you've got that.
Okay. Okay. No, that clarifies that. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, la um, I wanted
to pick up on your comments around regulatory relief.
And you state your perspective is
that there actually is a retrospective aspect
to the regulatory relief,
and I wondered if you wanted to
expand on your concerns around that.
You, you mentioned, for example, um,
potentially reopening decades of work
around existing planning controls
and even potential duplication.
Yeah, so there's a, there's a carve out, um,
for regulatory relief for someone
who made a submission on a, on a, on a restriction when the,
when they're in the RMA context, uh,
when the instruction restriction was imposed
in the RMA context.
Um, but there may be people who, who are satisfied
with those restrictions.
Not, not everyone disagrees with restrictions for, um,
and their ability for, for example, to, to, to,
to fail significant natural areas or,
or other important attributes,
and they might not have submitted,
and then they potentially get a, a windfall game
through this system.
So our, our preference is, um, that,
that retrospective development, um,
certainly be tightened up. Mm-hmm.
Okay. I thank you. And Ryan just had a
supplementary on that issue. Yeah,
I think you just answered my point is it just needs a
legislative tweak to make it explicit that the intent
Of the bill is to have no retro specificity
through the transition period or
after sort of, yeah, no,
that's not our only concern about regulatory relief.
Um, but that's, that's one, that's the concern about that,
that retrospective point, which, um,
I was asked about. Yeah. Thanks.
Look, thank you very much, uh, really thorough, uh,
weighty submission there.
Uh, lots of considerations to take on board
and yeah, we appreciate your time today.
So thank you very much, very much. Thank
You for, for hearing from us.
So, uh, members, that brings us to the end
of our public hearing today.
So we'll now move into private session.